Title: When Your State Estimator Has Lost The Plot: Detecting Estimator Failures Via Spectral Analysis

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.10623v1

Published Time: Wed, 12 Aug 2026 00:46:22 GMT

Number of Pages: 9

Markdown Content:
# When Your State Estimator Has Lost The Plot: Detecting Estimator Failures Via Spectral Analysis 

Christian Lanegger 1, Helen Oleynikova 2, Roland Siegwart 1, and Michael Pantic 1

> 1

Autonomous Systems Lab, ETH Zurich, Switzerland, 2Exclaim Robotics, Zurich, Switzerland 

Abstract —Reliable onboard state estimation is essential for safe robotic operation, yet unmodeled disturbances, such as sensor aliasing or out-of-distribution noise, still cause estimators to degrade or fail completely. While many methods aim to improve estimator robustness, only a few provide introspective mecha-nisms to assess estimate quality. Existing uncertainty measures, such as covariances, rely on idealized assumptions and tend to be overconfident, and more recent data-driven approaches are typically tied to their training data distributions. We propose a sensor-agnostic introspective method that as-sesses estimator health by analyzing the frequency-domain power distribution of recent velocity estimates. The method is evaluated using outdoor flight data from an aerial robot running vi-sual–inertial, LiDAR–inertial, and radar–inertial odometry. The dataset includes multiple estimator failures, enabling analysis of several frequency-domain indicators, such as signal power, spectral bandwidth, and entropy. We observe consistent spectral power differences between healthy and degraded estimates, al-lowing detection of 51 % –58 % of labeled failures with 60 % –84 % 

precision across three fundamentally different state estimation frameworks. Our results show that even a simple frequency-domain analysis of a state estimator’s output can serve as a lightweight introspective tool to complement existing robustness techniques in real-world robotic deployments, and opens promis-ing avenues for future investigation. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

When sitting in a stationary train that is about to depart, briefly observing a neighboring train begin to move can create a moment of confusion. Although no accelerating forces are felt, visual cues suggest motion, and the assumption of a static environment implies that one must be moving. This disagreement between sensory inputs pushes us to further inspect the surroundings until the inconsistency is resolved and it becomes clear that the other train is in motion. This ability to reason about conflicting sensory information and reassess the reliability of one’s perception is a form of introspection that humans rely on to handle unforeseen disturbances. Robotic systems, in contrast, often lack such introspective capabilities. Yet, as robots are increasingly deployed outside controlled environments, the ability to assess the reliability of their own state estimates becomes critical. This challenge is particularly pronounced for aerial robots, which are gradually being deployed for tasks such as inspection of bridges, wind turbines, and other critical infrastructure. These applications rely not only on high pose accuracy but also on robustness. When operating in close proximity to structures, even small errors in the state estimate can result in collisions with the environment and fatally damage the robot. Additionally, for such tasks aerial robots must operate under highly variable 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 Frequency [Hz] 0.25 0.75 1.25 1.75 2.25 0.25 0.75 1.25 1.75 2.25 0.25 0.75 1.25 1.75 2.25 Velocity bin upper limit [m/s] DLIO RIO RoVIO Healthy Failure      

> −5−4−3−2−10log10(PSD)

Fig. 1. Power spectral density (PSD) over the 0– 50 Hz frequency range for three different state estimators. The PSD is shown for healthy and failure-labeled data across different velocities, revealing clear differences in power distribution for faulty estimates for all estimators. DLIO contains no healthy data above 2.25 m /s in the dataset, and RoVIO is limited to a maximum PSD resolution of 15 Hz ; corresponding values are crossed out. 

conditions. Illumination, visual and geometric features, avail-able free space, and GNSS visibility can change drastically over time and across environments. No single sensing modality operates reliably across all such conditions, making multi-sensor state estimation essential, but also more susceptible to sensor degradation and unmodeled disturbances. Deploying complex mobile robots outside controlled lab-oratory environments therefore requires state estimators that fuse heterogeneous sensing modalities and, more importantly, can handle sensor failures and measurement degeneracies. Existing approaches mainly address robustness to Gaussian noise or expected degeneracies, yet they often remain vulner-able to non-Gaussian or unmodeled disturbances. Leveraging sensor diversity and redundancy—while avoiding single points of failure—is essential to maintain functionality under such conditions [26]. Likewise, decomposing the state-estimation pipeline into multiple sub-problems has been shown to in-crease resilience and preserve functionality during sensor dropouts [18, 20]. Maintaining estimator performance in the presence of unexpected disturbances requires detecting them. arXiv:2608.10623v1 [cs.RO] 11 Aug 2026 While dropouts are straightforward to identify, unmodeled disruptions require introspective methods capable of quantify-ing estimator trustworthiness with minimal prior assumptions about failure causes. To date, only a few works have directly addressed this problem [27, 17] and are robot-specific or scale badly with the number of sensors, leaving a clear gap in the literature. Using datasets obtained on an aerial robot running multiple onboard estimators (Lidar-, Visual-, and Radar-Inertial frameworks) which experienced various failure modes during flight, we investigated how the output signals of different state estimators behave in healthy and degraded/faulty states. Human operators are often able to tell that “something” is about to go wrong from time series and plots, without knowing internal states of the algorithms. How can we formalize such a signal and what is the working mechanism behind it? 

A. Contribution 

In this work, we show that spectral analysis can be used as an introspective tool to detect state estimator degeneracies in any kind of IMU-sensor fusion, regardless of modality (vision, lidar, radar) or algorithm (filtering or optimization). Compared to other methods, our contributed method does not rely on multi-sensor consensus and allows us to model the estimator as a black box, which addresses an often overlooked gap in state estimation literature. We present the ideation, design, and application of the method using labeled multi-sensor data obtained in the wild. Our analysis shows that many failures are reflected in the spectral characteristics of the velocity estimate, particularly through an increase in power in the higher-frequency bands. This observation forms the basis of the proposed state-estimator-integrity test which requires only (i) a velocity estimate output at a sufficiently high enough frequency and (ii) fusion of at least one sensor with an IMU. Our method specifically complements existing literature in case of unmodeled noise and unknown disturbances: a crucial capability for real-world robot deployment. II. R ELATED WORK 

Most modern on-board state estimators rely on the fusion of multiple sensors with complementary properties. Regardless of the sensor modalities, there are always defects, such as (non-gaussian) noise, degradation, outliers, and aliasing. The choice of tools used to robustify a state estimator against data defects hinges on the detectability of bad measurements. Figure 2 provides a detailed and structured overview of the related literature with citations. The rest of this chapter summarizes the coarse structure of the literature and details some illustrative examples. If the quality of measurements can be determined fairly reliably, bad measurements can either be discarded or fused into the estimate with weights/covariances that take the quality into account. If the detection of bad measurements is considered impossible or too unreliable ( apriori or a posteriori ), we cannot discard or down-weight such measurements. Including such measurement results in the slow degradation of the state estimate, leading to either divergence of state estimator over-confidence over time. Here, robustness is often achieved through fallbacks or redundant estimators and external monitoring of estimator health. In general, we consider active monitoring of estimator health through intro-spection to be underdeveloped in the literature. While there is previous work that uses consensus between estimators [17] or anomaly detection [27], there is a gap in the literature when it comes to inferring estimator health based only on the qualities of their output (except simple covariance/out-of-bounds thresholds). In the following, relevant examples of the different methods are given and discussed. 

A. Measurement rejection 

Measurement rejection methods are often tied to a specific sensor modality. For example, LiDAR-based frameworks can exploit the geometric properties of scans to assess whether the measurements sufficiently constrain the state estimate [21, 32]. Vision-based systems recently greatly benefited from data-driven methods, for example, for training end-to-end Visual-Inertial Odometry (VIO) systems robust to corrupted or miss-ing data [9], or for down-weighting unreliable visual features using self-supervised multi-view consistency [11]. 

B. Measurement down-weighting 

Backend robustness techniques aim to mitigate outliers at the estimation level. Filter-based approaches commonly rely on Mahalanobis distance thresholding [19] or statistical validation via χ2 tests [7, 6, 14]. In graph-based optimization, Switchable Constraints [31] and Dynamic Covariance Scaling [2] down-weight inconsistent measurements and are function-ally equivalent to robust M-estimators. M-estimators down-weight residuals that do not fit a Gaussian distribution at the cost of introducing at least one additional tuning parameter, which can be self-tuned using expectation maximization [1] or directly estimated by modeling sensor variance as a state variable [23]. All these methods assume Gaussian noise, an assumption frequently violated in practice. Non-Gaussian alternatives such as Gaussian Mixture Models (GMMs) have been proposed [28, 22], but often suffer from convergence issues, partially addressed in later work [24]. 

C. Redundancy and fallbacks 

If bad measurements cannot be detected individually, the estimator architecture can be made redundant by running multiple estimators that act as fallbacks. Avoiding single points of failure by exploiting redundancy and diversity is central to resilience [26], and has recently been adopted in sensor fusion. Examples include fallback factor graphs for GNSS outages [20] and decomposed estimation pipelines that improve robustness and accuracy [15, 18]. 

D. Health monitoring 

Despite these advances, most approaches target known dis-turbances. Truly resilient systems must also handle unknown and unmodeled failures, motivating the development of intro-spective methods with minimal assumptions. Existing health-monitoring techniques are limited: cross-comparing estimator Robust State Estimation Bad measurements considered detectable Reject measurement entirely Sensor-specific quality checks [21, 32, 25, 8] Filter gating via innovation tests [19, 7, 6, 14] Fuse measurement with lower weight Switch / scale factors in graphs [31, 2] Robust losses and adaptive variants [16, 4, 3] Self-tuning / learned reliability weights [1, 23, 9, 11] Model data defect distributions [28, 22, 24] Bad measurements considered NOT detectable Robustness through fallbacks/redundancy Fallback graphs / parallel estimators [20] Decompose estimation (local vs global) [15, 18] Distributed resilience to loss/attacks [29, 30, 34, 26] Monitor estimator health (introspection) Behavior/sensor-based anomaly detection [27] Estimator consensus [17] 

> Black box introspection [this work]

Fig. 2. Overview of related literature, structured by the assumption of detectability of bad measurements. 

outputs through consensus scales poorly and requires multiple reliable estimators [17], while behavior-based models such as Bayesian nonparametric (BNP) topic modeling [27] struggle to distinguish failures from nominal dynamics in highly agile aerial robots. Our method is what we consider an essential next step in health monitoring: an introspective failure detection method that does not rely on known noise models, modeled disturbances, or sensor consensus. III. W HY NOT JUST USE COVARIANCES ?Covariances are the uncertainty measure that is most com-monly provided by state-of-the-art state estimators. In practice, however, they are rarely used as a robust health measure, simply because they often fail to reflect the true estimate uncertainty. One key reason is that sensor models are often nei-ther known accurately nor Gaussian. This causes the reported covariance to often underestimate the true uncertainty and lose its probabilistic meaning. As a consequence, measurement covariances are typically not set to represent true sensor uncertainty, but are instead tuned to weight the influence of measurements on the state estimate in a way that yields accept-able performance for a given robot and operating environment. While the nominal sensor model may serve as a prior for this tuning process, unforeseen disturbances remain unmodeled. This mismatch often leads to underestimated uncertainty and overly confident state estimates. Another contributing factor is that model mismatches and unmodeled disturbances frequently manifest as changes in IMU bias estimates. Since these biases are co-estimated and not directly observable, the optimization backend may converge to a solution with small residuals and seemingly consistent covariances, even though the resulting state esti-mate—particularly the pose—is incorrect, essentially treating the biases as a “dumping ground” for uncertainty. An example of this behavior is shown in Figure 3, which compares position estimates from the VIO framework RoVIO [5] with the ground truth position during flight. We intentionally induced estimator failure through fast motions that create motion blur and flying towards feature-less surfaces. While the ground truth remains largely within the 3σ bounds along the x-axis, this is not the case for the y- and z-axes at approximately 60 s and 120 s .Here the estimator initially drifts and subsequently diverges. 5          

> 05X [m] 5
> 05Y [m] 020 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 Time [s] 05Z [m] 0.0 2.5 5.0 0.0 2.5 5.0 Error [m] 0.0 2.5 5.0 Groundtruth RoVIO 3-Sigma Bound

Fig. 3. 3-Sigma bounds (in light blue) output by RoVIO showing that covariances often do not quantify the uncertainty reliably. The red curve visualizes the error between estimate and ground truth. 

We intended to perform similar tests for the LiDAR-Inertial Odometry framework DLIO [10]. However, DLIO does not output state covariances. This, in itself, shows that practitioners do not generally rely on covariances and highlights the need for alternative inconsistency representations that better capture and flag estimator degradation. In Section V we analyze how changes in power distribution across frequency bands of a state estimate can serve as such a representation. IV. P RELIMINARIES 

To characterize the spectral content of a signal, we estimate its power spectral density (PSD) using Welch’s method [33] which reduces variance and spectral leakage while locally approximating a stationary signal. Welch’s method divides the 1-D signal x into M overlapping segments of length L

with overlap D. Each segment is detrended, i.e., its mean is removed, and then a modified periodogram ˆS(m) 

> xx

of each segment m is computed 

ˆS(m) 

> xx

[fk] = 1

Lf sU X(m) 

> B

[k] 2

, (1) where X(m) 

> B

[k] is the fast Fourier Transform (FFT) of the windowed segment, fk = kf s/L is the k-th frequency bin, fs

is the sampling frequency and U is a window normalization factor. The PSD estimate for the full signal is obtained by averaging across all segments, 

ˆSxx [fk] = 1

M 

> M−1

X

> m=0

ˆS(m) 

> xx

[fk]. (2) The selection of segment length, overlap, and windowing function depends on the intended use of the PSD and the spectral characteristics of interest, and is discussed further in Section V. To evaluate the ability of PSDs to distinguish healthy from degraded estimates, we analyze several band-limited spectral metrics, including power content, spectral centroid, spectral bandwidth, and spectral entropy. The total power contained in a frequency band [f1, f 2] is computed as 

Px(f1, f 2) = 

> f2

X 

> fk=f1

ˆSxx [fk] ∆ f, ∆f = fs

N . (3) with N being the total number of estimates used to compute the PSD. The spectral centroid, 

f xsc =

Pf2  

> fk=f1

fk ˆSxvv [fk]

Pf2 

> fk=f1

ˆSxvv [fk] , (4) indicates where most of the power is concentrated. The spec-tral bandwidth, 

σxsb =

vuutPf2  

> fk=f1

(fk − f xsc )2 ˆSxvv [fk]

Pf2 

> fk=f1

ˆSxvv [fk] , (5) quantifies how spread out the power is around the centroid. The spectral entropy, 

Hxs = −

> f2

X 

> fk=f1

pk log 2 pk, pk = ˆSxvv [fk]

Pf2 

> fk=f1

ˆSxvv [fk] , (6) measures irregularity in the frequency distribution. 

A. Aerial Robot Dataset and Failure Labeling  

> Fig. 4. Aerial Robot used for data collection equipped with three different exteroceptive sensors: a LiDAR, a radar, and a camera.

We collected 23 min of data from an aerial robot, shown in Figure 4, operating outdoors to evaluate the introspective spectral metrics. The dataset contains multiple instances of es-timator degradation and divergence caused by factors including changing lighting conditions, fast motions, sensor vibrations due to suboptimal mounting, limited onboard computation, and moving objects in the sensors’ fields of view. We ran three different state estimation frameworks on the robot: RoVIO running at 30 Hz , DLIO producing estimates at 

100 Hz , and an in-house graph-based sensor fusion framework built on GTSAM [12] with a radar–inertial frontend based on BRIO [13], which outputs estimates at 200 Hz . We refer to this framework as RIO. Evaluating the spectral characteristics of healthy and de-graded estimator behavior requires ground-truth labeling. In outdoor environments, however, determining the exact onset of estimator failure is difficult due to the absence of reliable ground-truth pose information. To address this, we labeled failures based on consensus among the three estimators. The data was divided into 0.1 s windows. For each window we computed the mean absolute velocity error between all es-timator pairs. If at least two estimators produced velocity estimates within a predefined error threshold, these estimates were labeled as healthy. If the third estimator exceeded the threshold relative to both others, it was labeled as faulty. The error threshold was set to 0.2 m /s, corresponding to a drift of 0.02 m over the window duration. This approach requires that at least two estimators remain reliable. In cases where multiple estimators exhibited clear drift or divergence, we manually labeled the affected segments. Using this procedure, we identified approximately 1.5 min of degraded or diverging estimates and 17 min as healthy. For data labeled as healthy, platform velocities ranged from 0 to 2.32 m /s, with an average of 0.14 m /s, indicating that most healthy data corresponds to low-speed motion. Velocities were chosen for labeling rather than poses as our method quantifies estimator health based on the accuracy of velocities they are expressed in the robot’s body frame, eliminating the need for frame alignment, another potential sources of error. V. S PECTRAL ANALYSIS AS TOOL FOR INTROSPECTION 

In this section we present and analyze the proposed frequency-domain approach, demonstrating how estimator fail-ures manifest in the power spectral density of estimates and how these characteristics can be used to distinguish healthy from degraded outputs. Modern state estimation frameworks output body-centric estimates of pose, velocity, and Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU) biases. In this work, we focus only on linear velocities expressed in the body frame. Linear velocity estimates tend to be more dynamic, reacting faster to estimator degradation than pose estimates. Angular velocities are not considered, since they are typically taken directly from IMU measurements rather than being part of the estimate. The proposed method is based on the assumption that state estimators which combine exteroceptive and proprioceptive sensors can experience internal disagreement under degenerate conditions. This disagreement manifests as increased noise in the estimated state. As a result, the distribution of signal power across the frequency spectrum changes, with particularly no-ticeable differences in the higher frequency bands. To compute an estimate of the velocity’s PSD we use Welch’s method with a Hann window for smoothing. Asegment overlap of L/ 2 is standard for Hann’s window and also works well for our use case. We also keep the segment length L ∈ [N/ 2, N ], with N being the total number of velocities estimated within the last 1 s . The resulting PSD covers the range for the frequency band fk ∈ [0 , f s/2] at a frequency resolution between 1 Hz and 2 Hz at the cost of increasing spectral leakage. The distinction in power con-tent between reliable and unreliable estimates can be seen in Figure 1 showing the logarithm of the average PSD of velocity estimates for healthy and faulty segments, binned by (apparent) velocity magnitude. While both healthy and faulty estimates concentrate power below 3 Hz , degraded estimates consistently exhibit increased power across the spectrum and higher variability. This indicates that high-frequencies power content and its larger variance is a strong indicator of estimator degradation. Power in lower frequencies, on the other hand, is dominated by the robot’s motion and directly linked to the magnitude of the velocities (notice the increased power for higher velocities). Further inspection of spectral metrics (Figure 5) supports this hypothesis. Total signal power logically increases with velocity magnitude regardless of estimator health. When con-sidering the full frequency range, the spectral centroid, band-width, and entropy all decrease for degraded estimates. There-fore, inspecting the full spectrum, power in the low frequencies still dominate and a good estimate of fast motion is indis-tinguishable from a degraded estimate. When excluding fre-quencies below 10 Hz , the spread of power content, quantified by its bandwidth, increases, particularly for the LiDAR- and radar-based estimators. A slight increase in spectral entropy is also observed on average, reflecting greater irregularity in the high-frequency components of degraded estimates. However, for all these metrics we observe a significant overlap in values between healthy and degraded estimates. Only absolute power content shows a clear separation. As healthy estimates do not show a significant increase in power at high frequencies, this enables the discrimination between healthy and faulty estimates. VI. T HRESHOLD AND CUT -O FF FREQUENCY SELECTION 

We want to find a single threshold in the high frequency power which would allow us to distinguish good from bad estimates and work across all velocity ranges. This threshold depends on the chosen cut-off frequency. Is there a single cut-off frequency and therefore threshold that works across all estimators and velocities? In Figure 5 right, we can see that at a cut-off frequency fco = 10 Hz , different estimators behave differently: for example, RIO has higher power in higher frequency bands than other estimators, even for healthy estimates. This indicates that a higher cut-off frequency is needed for RIO, and that the ideal cut-off is estimator-dependent. What about velocities? Ideally, the cut-off should lie just above the maximum frequency to which the robot’s nominal motion contributes in terms power. As can be seen in Figure 1, even healthy estimates have higher power in the higher-frequency bands at higher velocities. Therefore, a higher cut-off frequency is needed for higher velocities as well, and the ideal cut-off frequency may be both estimator- and velocity-dependent. However, a reasonable compromise might be good enough. How can we find the optimal threshold and cut-off fre-quency given labeled data? Figure 6 provides an answer: using precision-recall curves and maximizing the F1 score, it is possible to find the optimum both for individual estimators and for all estimators taken together. When evaluated across all estimators, the best overall performance is achieved with a cut-off frequency of 4 Hz (Figure 6), detecting approximately half of all failures with a precision of 78 % . Evaluating the estimators individually reveals that individual higher cut-off frequencies yield improved performance: 10 Hz for RoVIO and 25 Hz for both DLIO and RIO. DLIO and RoVIO achieve precisions of 84 % and 71 % at recalls of 58 % and 60 % ,respectively, while RIO performs worst, with a precision of 

61 % at 51 % recall (Table I). The reduced performance for the radar-based estimator is likely due to its generally larger high-frequency power content during healthy operation, which reduces the contrast between nominal and degraded behavior. This effect may be intrinsic to the estimator design but could also be influenced by labeling inaccuracies. Inaccuracies in our labeling approach are most pronounced at low velocities, which often coincide with the onset of estimator degradation. Exactly determining the moment when an estimate transitions from healthy to faulty is inherently ambiguous. This uncer-tainty may result in mislabeled data near the boundary between reliable and degraded operation. 

A. Threshold Selection Without Labeled Data 

In practice, it is often impractical to collect a large number of datasets featuring degraded estimators, and then produce accurate labels for them. How can we find reasonable thresh-olds and cut-off frequencies without labels? To address this, we evaluate two heuristic strategies for determining the cut-off frequency using only healthy data (which is easy to get). The intuition behind our approach is that, looking at Figure 1, having only healthy data gives us only the top plots, and we hypothesize that the lack of power content at higher frequencies is filled only during failures. Therefore, we identify the frequencies where there is typically no power in normal, healthy estimates. We suggest two ways of doing this: the first is an absolute threshold, where we select the highest frequency band whose power does not exceed 10 −5 m2 s−2.Due to the velocity-dependence of the estimates, we split the velocity range into bins of 0.1 m /s, and compute a cut-off per bin. The second method uses a relative threshold instead, selecting the cut-off frequency above which the power does not exceed 0.5 % of the median total power at that Centroid Bandwidth Entropy Centroid 10 Hz      

> Bandwidth 10 Hz Entropy 10 Hz
> Power Power 10 Hz
> 2
> 0246Metric Value (scaled)  Healthy (DLIO) Healthy (RIO) Healthy (ROVIO) Failure (DLIO) Failure (RIO) Failure (ROVIO) 0.00-0.75 0.75-1.50 1.50-2.25 2.25-3.00 Velocity bin [m/s] 020 40 60 80 100 Power  10Hz (scaled)  Healthy Healthy 10 Hz
> Failure 10 Hz
> DLIO RIO RoVIO

Fig. 5. Left: Spectral metrics for the full frequency band and for ≥10 Hz band of the different estimator’s velocity signal during failure and trustworthy operation. Right: Power of the full frequency and for ≥10 Hz band for healthy and faulty distributions at different velocities. While all power increases for larger velocities, power contained in the range above 10 Hz increases only at failures. Note: All values are standardized to a median and interquartile range of 1 using the healthy data of the respective spectral metric or velocity bin. 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Recall 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Precision 

> F1=0.2 F1=0.4 F1=0.6 F1=0.8 Fixed Max Power Self-Supervised 4 Hz 10 Hz 12 Hz 25 Hz 30 Hz 45 Hz Chance (0.091)

Fig. 6. Precision-Recall Curves for all estimators combined at different cut-off frequencies, and comparing two different methods of selecting a threshold from only healthy data (fixed max power and self-supervised). The markers label the thresholds that maximize the F1-score. 

velocity. While the fixed power-based cut-off performs poorly, the relative cut-off achieves comparable performance across the combined estimator set and for individual estimators (Figure 7). Interestingly, setting the power threshold such that only 1.5 % of healthy data exceed it, effectively corresponding to a 1.5 % false positive rate, and combining this threshold with the relative cut-off frequency yields performance close to that of estimator-specific tuning, without requiring labeled data of failures. Under this configuration, our method achieves the best overall performance on DLIO, with a precision of 

86 % at a recall of 56 .5 % . On RoVIO, it attains similarly high precision but at a substantially lower recall, falling below 

50 % . This reduced recall is likely due to RoVIO’s tendency to degrade slowly and gradually rather than fail abruptly, as illustrated in Figure 3. Such smooth drift results in a slow but steady increase in estimated velocity that can be difficult to distinguish from legitimate motion, particularly in the absence of pronounced high-frequency disturbances. This 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Recall 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Precision 

> F1=0.2 F1=0.4 F1=0.6 F1=0.8 dlio 25 Hz dlio Self-Supervised dlio 1.5% FP rio+fslb 25 Hz rio+fslb Self-Supervised rio+fslb 1.5% FP rovio 10 Hz rovio Self-Supervised rovio 1.5% FP

Fig. 7. Precision-Recall Curves for every estimator individually at the best performing and variable self-supervised cut-off frequency. The hexagonal marker represents the operating point which achieves maximal 1.5 % false positives. The other markers mark the thresholds that maximize the F1-score. 

behavior is further reflected in the low optimal threshold for RoVIO—nearly two orders of magnitude smaller than for the other estimators. While effective on the evaluated dataset, such a low threshold is likely to increase false positives, and thus reduce precision, in scenarios with more uniformly distributed or higher-velocity motion. 

B. Performance On Groundtruth Dataset 

To further showcase the introspectiveness of our proposed approach we evaluate its performance on an aerial dataset that includes state estimates from RoVIO and ground truth poses (also discussed in section III). Our approach quantifies the degradation of estimates and is not a measure of accuracy. We therefore compare the high frequency power content to the relative pose error (RPE) between RoVIO and the ground truth. To classify the data we again divide the estimates into windows of 0.1 s . For every window we compute the RPE and again label estimates as faulty if the RPE exceeds 0.2 m .Figure 8 shows the power content RoVIO’s velocity estimate TABLE I METRICS FOR DIFFERENT STATE ESTIMATORS AT VARIOUS CUT -OFF FREQUENCIES . S HADED ROWS INDICATE THE BEST PR-AUC PER ESTIMATOR . I TALICIZED ROWS INDICATE THAT ONLY HEALTHY DATA WAS USED TO SET fco AND THRESHOLD .State Est. fco th f 1 PR-AUC Precision Recall [Hz] (m/s )2 [-] [-] [-] All 10 −5 5.61e-4 0.58 0.785 0.437 All 0.5% 8.14e-4 0.61 0.769 0.484 All 4 1.293e-3 0.636 0.782 0.497 All 10 7.11e-4 0.59 0.806 0.45 All 12 6.23e-4 0.58 0.809 0.435 DLIO+RIO 25 2.08e-4 0.684 0.783 0.546 DLIO+RIO 30 1.66e-4 0.682 0.787 0.532 DLIO+RIO 45 6.10e-5 0.667 0.756 0.509 DLIO 25 2.25e-4 0.728 0.841 0.582 DLIO 0.5% 8.57e-4 0.716 0.815 0.592                                                       

> DLIO(1.5%FP) 0.5% 9.59e-4 0.716 0.861 0.565 RIO 25 1.35e-4 0.627 0.607 0.512 RIO 0.5% 7.17e-4 0.628 0.674 0.477
> RIO(1.5%FP) 0.5 %5.07e-4 0.628 0.581 0.525 RoVIO 10 5.00e-6 0.708 0.715 0.599 RoVIO 0.5% 2.40e-5 0.664 0.763 0.507
> RoVIO(1.5%FP) 0.5% 3.60e-5 0.664 0.843 0.447 020 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 Time [s]
> −0.05 0.00 0.05 0.10 Error increase [m] (over 0.1s)  Error Power ≥10Hz Thresholds 012345Power [( m/s )2]
> ×10 −5
> Fig. 8. Comparison of high-frequency power content and relative pose error (RPE) for RoVIO on the aerial dataset. Shown are the RPE over 0.1 s
> windows (blue), the velocity power content above 10 Hz (red), and their respective thresholds (dashed). Increases in high-frequency power coincide with estimator degradation and divergence, notably around 60 s and 120 s .Early power spikes occur during takeoff despite low RPE, likely due to unconverged IMU biases.

for fco = 10 Hz , the threshold limit at 5e−6, as well as the RPE with the corresponding threshold at 0.02 m . Over the whole dataset, our method detects the estimate health correctly for 85 % of the data. Notably, at around 120 s when RoVIO diverges, the power content correctly increases. Also, at 60 s during which RoVIO drifts (see Figure 3), we can observe a spike in high-frequency power content that exceeds the defined threshold. Two instances in power increase can be seen at the beginning of the dataset ( t ≤ 20 s ) even though the RPE remained low. During this time the platform was stationary and around 20 s took off. At that time, the IMU biases have not converged yet, which most likely causes the increase in observed power. This indicates that the high-frequency power content does not only highlight degradation of the velocity estimate, but also when any velocity dependent state is inaccurately estimated. Additionally, inspecting the spectral characteristics of the IMU could provide additional useful insight on estimator health. VII. R ESULTS SUMMARY 

The results presented show that the distribution of power content changes between reliable and unreliable estimates. We find that this behavior holds for estimators in general and that it depends neither on the fused sensor modality (camera, lidar, radar) nor on the used backend (filter-based or optimization-based). Finding a single cut-off frequency and power threshold for any state estimator is possible; our method achieves a PR-AUC of 0.64. However, our proposed method achieves better performance when these parameters are tuned individually for each state estimator (PR-AUC ranging from 0.63 to 0.73). Having labeled data helps set the fco and threshold, but we show that it is not strictly required. Using only healthy data, which is much easier to obtain, we achieve similar performance, as shown in Table I. Additionally, we believe that the observed performance could likely be further improved by better labeled datasets. On one dataset for which ground truth was available, we correctly classified the estimator’s condition for 85 % of the total estimates (see Section IV-A). VIII. L IMITATIONS 

Frequency-domain analysis provides useful introspective indicators of estimator health, but still has several limita-tions that warrant discussion and motivate future work. Its effectiveness depends on increased high-frequency content: smooth or slowly accumulating drift, as well as complete sensor dropouts, often lack strong high-frequency signatures and are difficult to detect via spectral analysis, particularly at low velocities, where healthy and degraded signals are similar. All estimators exhibit changes in spectral properties in the presence of degeneracies. However, design choices, such as filtering, optimization, and noise characteristics, can influence the amount of spectral content in higher frequency bands. This limits the generalizability of fixed thresholds and requires estimator-specific tuning to improve performance. Still, rea-sonable cut-offs and thresholds can often be estimated without hard-to-obtain failure-labeled data. More principled methods for automatic threshold selection could further improve ro-bustness. Finally, data collection and labeling remain significant chal-lenges. Capturing diverse and representative failure modes requires in-the-wild operation, where ground truth is typi-cally unavailable. Labeling via estimator consensus or manual inspection is imperfect, particularly near transition regions where degradation occurs gradually. Additionally, labeling is inherently application- and platform-dependent: in some tasks, millimeter-level errors are unacceptable, while in others, centimeter-scale drift is tolerable. This subjectivity directly affects labeling and evaluation. Our dataset is imbalanced, with failures occurring far less frequently than nominal operation, and biased toward low velocities, increasing the method’s sensitivity to small changes in threshold selection. More di-verse, application-specific datasets would enable more reliable threshold selection and help further characterize the method’s limitations. IX. C ONCLUSION 

As robots are increasingly deployed in unstructured and unpredictable environments, the ability to assess the reliability of their own state estimates becomes critical. Unlike humans, robotic systems typically lack introspection and may continue operating on faulty estimates, where even small errors can have severe consequences. This paper introduced a simple and widely applicable approach for detecting failures in state estimation. The method is independent of the specific sensor modality or estimation backend and treats the estimator as a black box, relying only on the fact that it performs IMU-based sensor fusion. At present, estimator-agnostic methods that assess the reliability of state estimates remain largely unexplored. In practice, the proposed method could inform downstream decisions and trigger safety mechanisms such as estimator resets, estimator switching, or sensor deactivation. We showed that spectral analysis of estimated velocities provides an effective introspective signal. Estimator failures consistently manifest as increased high-frequency power in the power spectral density, while healthy estimates remain smooth. Intuitively, this behavior can be explained by internal disagreements in IMU-based sensor fusion, which lead to jumpy velocity estimates that are especially visible in higher frequency bands. Experimental results show promising per-formance and, importantly, they reveal similar degradation patterns across different estimators and sensor modalities. The choice of cut-off frequency and detection threshold has a direct impact on the correct classification of estimator health. How-ever, we demonstrated that suitable parameters can be found without requiring labeled failure data or ground truth. By tuning the cut-off frequency in a self-supervised manner and setting conservative thresholds, reliable detection can still be achieved even when only healthy data is available. Overall, this work shows that frequency-domain analysis offers a practical and estimator-agnostic way to reason about state estimation reliability. Future work includes extending the approach to other robot platforms beyond aerial systems, incorporating ad-ditional signals such as IMU bias behavior, exploring velocity-dependent thresholds, and investigating learned variants of the method. Together, these directions could further strengthen introspective capabilities in real-world robotic systems. REFERENCES 

[1] Gabriel Agamennoni, Paul Furgale, and Roland Siegwart. Self-tuning M-estimators. In 2015 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages 4628–4635. IEEE, 2015. [2] Pratik Agarwal, Gian Diego Tipaldi, Luciano Spinello, Cyrill Stachniss, and Wolfram Burgard. Robust map optimization using dynamic covariance scaling. In 2013 IEEE international conference on robotics and automa-tion , pages 62–69. Ieee, 2013. [3] Jonathan T. Barron. A General and Adaptive Robust Loss Function. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) ,June 2019. [4] Michael J Black and Paul Anandan. The robust esti-mation of multiple motions: Parametric and piecewise-smooth flow fields. Computer vision and image under-standing , 63(1):75–104, 1996. [5] Michael Bloesch, Michael Burri, Sammy Omari, Marco Hutter, and Roland Siegwart. Iterated extended Kalman filter based visual-inertial odometry using direct photo-metric feedback. The International Journal of Robotics Research , 36(10):1053–1072, 2017. [6] Christian Brommer, Roland Jung, Jan Steinbrener, and Stephan Weiss. MaRS: A modular and robust sensor-fusion framework. IEEE Robotics and Automation Let-ters , 6(2):359–366, 2020. [7] B. Brumback and M. Srinath. A Chi-square test for fault-detection in Kalman filters. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control , 32(6):552–554, 1987. doi: 10.1109/ TAC.1987.1104658. [8] Christopher Brunner and Thierry Peynot. Perception Quality Evaluation with Visual and Infrared Cameras in Challenging Environmental Conditions. In International Symposium on Experimental Robotics , 2014. [9] Changhao Chen, Stefano Rosa, Yishu Miao, Chris Xiaox-uan Lu, Wei Wu, Andrew Markham, and Niki Trigoni. Selective sensor fusion for neural visual-inertial odom-etry. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 10542– 10551, 2019. [10] Kenny Chen, Ryan Nemiroff, and Brett T Lopez. Di-rect LiDAR-Inertial Odometry: Lightweight LIO with Continuous-Time Motion Correction. 2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automa-tion (ICRA) , pages 3983–3989, 2023. doi: 10.1109/ ICRA48891.2023.10160508. [11] Seungwon Choi, Donggyu Park, Seo-Yeon Hwang, and Tae-Wan Kim. Statistical Uncertainty Learning for Robust Visual-Inertial State Estimation, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.01648. [12] Frank Dellaert and GTSAM Contributors. borglab/gtsam, May 2022. URL https://github.com/borglab/gtsam. ver-sion 4.2a8. [13] Rik Girod, Marco Hauswirth, Patrick Pfreundschuh, Mar-iano Biasio, and Roland Siegwart. A robust baro-radar-inertial odometry m-estimator for multicopter navigation in cities and forests. In IEEE Int. Conf. Multisensor Fusion Integration Intell. Syst. , 2024. [14] Karol Hausman, Stephan Weiss, Roland Brockers, Larry Matthies, and Gaurav S Sukhatme. Self-calibrating multi-sensor fusion with probabilistic measurement validation for seamless sensor switching on a UAV. In 2016 IEEE international conference on robotics and automation (ICRA) , pages 4289–4296. IEEE, 2016. [15] Dongjiao He, Haotian Li, and Jie Yin. Ligo: A tightly coupled lidar-inertial-gnss odometry based on a hierarchy fusion framework for global localization with real-time mapping. IEEE Transactions on Robotics , 2025. [16] Peter J Huber. Robust estimation of a location param-eter. In Breakthroughs in statistics: Methodology and distribution , pages 492–518. Springer, 1992. [17] Christian Lanegger, Helen Oleynikova, Michael Pantic, Lionel Ott, and Roland Siegwart. To Fuse or Not to Fuse: Measuring Consistency in Multi-sensor Fusion for Aerial Robots. In International Symposium on Experimental Robotics , pages 364–374. Springer, 2023. [18] Christian Lanegger, Michael Pantic, Rik B¨ ahnemann, Roland Siegwart, and Lionel Ott. Chasing millimeters: design, navigation and state estimation for precise in-flight marking on ceilings. Autonomous Robots , 47(8): 1405–1418, 2023. [19] Simon Lynen, Markus W Achtelik, Stephan Weiss, Mar-garita Chli, and Roland Siegwart. A robust and modular multi-sensor fusion approach applied to MAV navigation. In 2013 IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent robots and systems , pages 3923–3929. IEEE, 2013. [20] Julian Nubert, Shehryar Khattak, and Marco Hutter. Graph-based multi-sensor fusion for consistent local-ization of autonomous construction robots. In 2022 International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages 10048–10054. IEEE, 2022. [21] Julian Nubert, Etienne Walther, Shehryar Khattak, and Marco Hutter. Learning-based localizability estimation for robust lidar localization. In 2022 IEEE/RSJ Inter-national Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , pages 17–24. IEEE, 2022. [22] Edwin Olson and Pratik Agarwal. Inference on networks of mixtures for robust robot mapping. The International Journal of Robotics Research , 32(7):826–840, 2013. [23] Tim Pfeifer, Sven Lange, and Peter Protzel. Dynamic Covariance Estimation—A parameter free approach to robust Sensor Fusion. In 2017 IEEE International Conference on Multisensor Fusion and Integration for Intelligent Systems (MFI) , pages 359–365. IEEE, 2017. [24] Tim Pfeifer, Sven Lange, and Peter Protzel. Advancing mixture models for least squares optimization. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 6(2):3941–3948, 2021. [25] Patrick Pfreundschuh, Helen Oleynikova, Cesar Cadena, Roland Siegwart, and Olov Andersson. Coin-lio: Com-plementary intensity-augmented lidar inertial odometry. In 2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages 1730–1737. IEEE, 2024. [26] Amanda Prorok, Matthew Malencia, Luca Carlone, Gau-rav S. Sukhatme, Brian M. Sadler, and Vijay Kumar. Beyond Robustness: A Taxonomy of Approaches to-wards Resilient Multi-Robot Systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.12343 , 2021. [27] Ben-Yair Raanan, James Bellingham, Yanwu Zhang, Mathieu Kemp, Brian Kieft, Hanumant Singh, and Yo-gesh Girdhar. Detection of unanticipated faults for au-tonomous underwater vehicles using online topic models. 

Journal of Field Robotics , 35(5):705–716, 2018. [28] David M Rosen, Michael Kaess, and John J Leonard. Robust incremental online inference over sparse factor graphs: Beyond the Gaussian case. In 2013 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation ,pages 1025–1032. IEEE, 2013. [29] David Saldana, Amanda Prorok, Shreyas Sundaram, Mario FM Campos, and Vijay Kumar. Resilient con-sensus for time-varying networks of dynamic agents. In 

2017 American control conference (ACC) , pages 252– 258. IEEE, 2017. [30] Brent Schlotfeldt, Vasileios Tzoumas, and George J Pap-pas. Resilient active information acquisition with teams of robots. IEEE Transactions on Robotics , 38(1):244– 261, 2021. [31] Niko S¨ underhauf and Peter Protzel. Switchable con-straints for robust pose graph SLAM. In 2012 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Sys-tems , pages 1879–1884. IEEE, 2012. [32] Turcan Tuna, Julian Nubert, Yoshua Nava, Shehryar Khattak, and Marco Hutter. X-icp: Localizability-aware lidar registration for robust localization in extreme envi-ronments. IEEE Transactions on Robotics , 40:452–471, 2023. [33] P. Welch. The use of fast Fourier transform for the estimation of power spectra: A method based on time averaging over short, modified periodograms. IEEE Transactions on Audio and Electroacoustics , 15(2):70– 73, 1967. doi: 10.1109/TAU.1967.1161901. [34] Thomas Wheeler, Ezhil Bharathi, and Stephanie Gil. Switching topology for resilient consensus using wi-fi signals. In 2019 international conference on robotics and automation (ICRA) , pages 2018–2024. IEEE, 2019.