Title: Don't Fool Me Twice: Adapting to Adversity in the Wild with Experience-Driven Reasoning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.31119v1

Published Time: Mon, 01 Jun 2026 01:02:05 GMT

Number of Pages: 12

Markdown Content:
# Don’t Fool Me Twice: Adapting to Adversity in the Wild with Experience-Driven Reasoning 

Navin Sriram Ravie 1, Andrew Jong 2, Krrish Jain 2, John Liu 2, Omar Alama 2,Bijo Sebastian †1, Sebastian Scherer †21Department of Engineering Design, Indian Institute of Technology, Madras 

2Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University 

† Equal Advising 

Fig. 1: Our framework “Don’t Fool Me Twice” (DFM2) enables robots to learn from adversities in the wild. In the green region, the robot faces no adversity. However, in the red region it observes a perturbance in its trajectory. DFM2 reasons over semantics about the most likely cause (here, a fan) and learns to characterize the extent to which that cause impacts the robot. When recognizing the same semantics later, the robot infers a safe distance from the danger and plans an appropriate path (blue) to circumvent the adversity. 

Abstract —In robotics, dangers and adversity modes are often embodiment-specific and relative to each agent. A frontier of autonomous mobile robotics is to enable agents to operate effectively in the wild in unseen unstructured environments. A significant challenge in unseen unstructured environments is that it may not be possible to predict all the dangers to the specific robot. Although recent work has used large foundation vision-language models (VLMs) to preemptively predict an exhaustive list of common-sense dangers, it remains difficult to capture possible interaction and embodiment-dependent adversities. We propose a continual learning framework for a mobile embodied agent to learn online from disturbances and attribute anomalous behaviours to causes through semantics, enabling better prediction and planning of the world in the future. Our framework, “Don’t Fool Me Twice”, first observes disturbances and describes their effects on the robot; this description is augmented with visual context to query a VLM to predict possible causes; the local disturbance is characterized using kernel regression, which allows for efficient, few-shot modeling of transient anomalies. We leverage semantic voxel-centric modeling to estimate epistemic uncertainty, enabling richer downstream recovery by treating interaction-driven disturbances as learnable spatial behaviors. We present four hypotheses and validate them in simulation and on hardware across embodiments and adversity modes. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Autonomous robots deployed in open-world environments face embodiment-specific adversities that cannot be fully anticipated beforehand. These embodiment-specific adver-sities have effects that are relative to each robot. A wet floor, for instance, poses a danger to a wheeled robot but not to a micro-aerial vehicle. However, between two given wheeled robots, the adversity may manifest differently due to differences in their tractive systems. Currently, mobile robots use different frameworks for localization and odometry esti-mation; some use simple wheel odometry with IMU based fusion, while others fuse stereo-inertial visual odometry or even other sensors. A mobile robot can use any of the multitude of available SOTA frameworks. However, each of them fails under different edge cases: a Visual Odometry (VO) pipeline might suffer near-overexposure on its cameras or near textureless surfaces as we see with [1] [2], and 

> arXiv:2605.31119v1 [cs.RO] 29 May 2026

a LiDAR Inertial Odometry (LIO) system can fail near reflective surfaces [3] [4]. Inside any mobile robot, a series of such complex algorithms accomplishing tasks ranging from perception, localization, mapping and control, operate in tandem, and each of these has different modes of adversity that are undocumented or highly unintuitive. As the world moves towards more end-to-end learning based systems for each of these tasks, it’s imperative to also consider the edge cases where such trained models could fail. While large vision-language models (VLMs) offer a shortcut [5] [6] [7] [8] by enumerating hazards from visual scenes, they lack awareness of embodiment-specific interactions, yielding over-conservative planners that may detour around objects posing no real threat to the specific robot. This raises the key question: how can an embodied agent autonomously discover, characterize, and adapt to adversities through its own operational experience? 

We present Don’t Fool Me Twice (DFM2) , a framework that builds a library of semantically associated adversities through operational experience. We define an adversity as any disturbance that produces a measurable deviation in a robot’s operational signals from nominal behavior. A key insight of DFM2 is that interaction-driven disturbances often exhibit structured spatial behavior tied to semantic geometry. By associating anomalous operational deviations with semantic features, DFM2 constructs a retrievable library of adver-sity experiences grounded in operational interaction. Each adversity is further characterized through semantic voxel-centric disturbance modeling, enabling the robot to adapt when similar hazards reappear. Our main contributions are:  

> •

Experience-Driven Semantic Association: We dis-cover and characterize long-tail hazards by attributing anomalous operational signal deviations to dense vi-sual semantics, building a personalized “danger library” through post-hoc reasoning.  

> •

Decoupled Few-Shot Interaction Modeling: We con-strain spatial geometry via semantic voxel priors and structured spatial disturbance models, reducing adapta-tion to a constrained optimization requiring only sparse interaction data.  

> •

Uncertainty-Aware Predictive Adaptation: We esti-mate epistemic uncertainty via Bayesian Linear Regres-sion over a fixed shape template, enabling proactive, conservative planning near novel hazards. II. R ELATED WORK 

A. Semantic Hazard Anticipation with Vision–Language Models 

Recent research has increasingly leveraged Vision– Language Models (VLMs) to provide semantic priors for proactive hazard assessment in unstructured environments. For example, Language as Cost (LaC) [7] utilizes zero-shot VLM prompting to interpret visual scenes and map textual hazard cues into spatial costmaps via Gaussian cost propaga-tion. Similarly, V-RoAst [8] introduces a VLM-based visual question-answering (VQA) framework to classify infrastruc-ture safety attributes at regular road segments. Chakraborty 

et al. [9] further addressed the perceptual limitations of VLMs in raw image recognition by proposing a “scene-graph–guided alignment” that structures environmental cues into relational object graphs. While these efforts demonstrate that foundation models encode rich hazard concepts, they predominantly rely on a proactive “query at regular inter-vals” strategy. This approach typically casts a wide net by cataloging all potential adversities based on internet-scale common-sense priors, which introduces significant compu-tational latency and over-conservatism often forcing detours around objects that look dangerous but pose no actual threat to a specific robot embodiment. 

B. Few-Shot Interaction Modeling 

Modeling robot–environment interactions has traditionally been studied through online system identification [10], which assumes a fixed parametric structure and sufficient training points, assumptions that often break down during transient events. To relax these constraints, kernel-based regression and Gaussian Processes (GPs) have been widely used to model unknown dynamics and disturbance fields [11], [12]. A common failure mode across kernel and GP methods in low-data regimes is joint hyperparameter optimization: when kernel length-scales are optimized alongside amplitude from N < 50 observations, the marginal likelihood landscape is non-convex and poorly conditioned, often yielding degen-erate solutions [13] [14]. Related approaches learn residual dynamics or disturbance fields on top of nominal models [15] or estimate spatial fields using basis functions or grids [16], [17], but typically treat residuals as unstructured functions or require dense exploration. Meta-learning and fast adaptation methods [18], [19] mitigate data scarcity via task-level pre-training, yet offer limited robustness to genuinely novel, long-tail hazards. 

C. Continual Learning and Runtime Monitoring 

Modern frameworks have moved toward hierarchical mon-itoring loops and retrieval-augmented memory to prevent catastrophic forgetting. Recent developments have solidified the utility of slow-fast loops. The Monitor-Analyse-Plan-Execute-Knowledge ( MAPE-K ) architecture has evolved into variants like MAPLE-K . MAPLE-K enhances this structure by embedding a continuous learning (L) step, which integrates semantic grounding in our case. Our framework, DFM2, synthesizes strengths from several contemporary systems: 

AESOP [6]: Provides high-rate anomaly detection via em-bedding similarity but lacks semantic causality. FORTRESS 

[5]: Uses VLMs to identify safe fallback goals but suf-fers from over-conservativeness due to binary hazard labels. 

DRAE [20]: Utilizes a non-parametric Bayesian memory to store specialized “experts” without corruption. Fig. 2: Proposed pipeline of Don’t Fool Me Twice showing its a) fast loop (green) and b) slow loop (red). As the robot encounters an anomalous disturbance at (1), it stores and reasons about the drift, finding out that it was the fan that was the source of disturbance. As it resumes in the fast loop, it sees another fan at (2) and using the expanded danger library, it knows that it is an object of risk III. P RELIMINARIES 

A. System Definitions 

We consider a mobile robot operating in a 3D environment with state x ∈ R3 representing its Cartesian position. The robot is tasked with following a reference trajectory τref 

generated by a high-level planner. We assume the robot is equipped with a reliable low-level controller (e.g., a PID or MPC-based position controller) that maps control inputs 

u ∈ U to velocities, maintaining a bounded tracking error in nominal, disturbance-free conditions. We define an adversity 

as any disturbance that degrades a robot’s ability to execute its intended task, manifesting as measurable deviations in operational signals such as, but not limited to, trajectory tracking error or state estimation reliability. To capture these varied failure modes across heterogeneous robotic platforms and sensory configurations, we introduce a generalized, time-varying operational monitoring signal ν(t). In this work, the signal ν(t) is dynamically mapped based on the active embodiment and context: 

ν(t) = 

(

∥xobs (t) − xref (t)∥, (Trajectory Tracking Error) Tr (Σpose (t)) , (State Estimation Uncertainty) (1) where xref (t) and xobs (t) represent the reference and executed coordinates respectively, and Tr (Σpose (t)) denotes the trace of the state estimator’s pose covariance matrix. For most of the work, we will use the definition of tracking error for defining an adversity. An adversity event is then parameterized via a binary operational indicator function a(t) ∈ { 0, 1} defined as: 

a(t) = I (ν(t) > θ ) (2) where I(·) is the indicator function and θ is a context-specific detection threshold. To precisely calibrate θ and characterize baseline sensor and actuator noise floor variations, the robot executes a prior calibration run path within a nominal, anomaly-free space. 

B. Problem Statement 

Given an active reference trajectory τref and a continuous stream of online operational measurements ν(t), the objective of this work is to build an experience-driven reasoning architecture that can: 1) Detect anomalous operational adversities in real-time when the indicator function turns active ( a(t) = 1 ). 2) Infer the latent semantic cause c ∈ C of the localized disturbance post-hoc by leveraging a Vision-Language Model (VLM). 3) Learn a highly sample-efficient predictive model f :

R3 → R of the localized disturbance field magnitude alongside its epistemic uncertainty. IV. M ETHODOLOGY 

After calibration, the robot follows its planned path τref 

while continuously monitoring for any perceived distur-bances. The architecture is organized into two complemen-tary pathways: a fast loop and a slow loop .

A. 3D Semantic Search for Adversity 

At the core of the fast loop is a high-frequency perception module that detects risk-relevant objects using the dynamic danger library Ωt, which stores embeddings of previously observed adversity causes. Detection is performed via em-bedding similarity sim (·, ·) search between encoded image features and the danger library, offering spatial granularity and richer generalizability over text-based matching. We build on the NARadio encoder from RayFronts [21] with openVDB [22] based mapping backbone. NARadio leverages Radio vision foundation model encoder [23] which Fig. 3: Narration workflow showcasing the event driven narration framework showing each aspect of the narration prompt distills features from diverse vision encoders (SAM for segmentation, DINOv2 for context, and SigLIP for language alignment). RADIO’s vision embeddings are projected into the SigLIP [24] language space through adapters trained during distillation. A simple patch level projection through the adapter yields dense language aligned visual features Incoming RGB images are thus transformed by Embed vision 

into spatially consistent feature maps at the pixel level in the SigLIP space ( Embed lang ). By performing sim (·, ·), we extract hotspot masks through simple thresholding. These pixels are projected, voxelized and integrated into the un-derlying openVDB generated voxel map. The resulting masks are an approximation of the segmentation mask of the object, since we work with a resized similarity map. Spatio-temporal consistency filtering across frames is further done to ensure sharper 3D segmentation. 

B. Anomaly Detection and Reasoning 

The system continuously evaluates trajectory tracking error 

∆τ = |τobs − τref | against the calibrated threshold θ derived during risk-free calibration. When ∆τ > θ , an anomaly event is flagged. The anomaly detection module records the onset and offset of each breach and buffers multimodal data (RGB, depth, pose throughout the breach event). Upon anomaly detection, the system transitions into a narrative construction and reasoning stage. It synthesizes the intended ( τref ) and actual ( τobs ) behaviors and analyzes relevant metrics (e.g., 

∆τ , rate of change, curvature). Instead of querying the VLM blindly we provide a multimodal grounding. The system generates a multi-modal experience log, sim-ilar to [5] but with a linguistically-grounded narrative about the experience and a set of visual anchor images taken before the anomalous encounter. Anomaly detection acts as a better event-driven key-frame extraction method to feed the VLM compared to most methods that simply query a VLM at reg-ular intervals. Event-driven querying reduces conservatism, filters candidates by spatial proximity, and isolates the single causal object, directly reducing false positives. We test our narration framework with different models and reasoning techniques. The full prompting process is shown in Fig. 3 

C. Cause Localization 

The VLM outputs a textual description of the object, the VLM might simply output a visual anchor, For example instead of naming the cause as a vent opening on the floor, it outputs the cause as a silver rectangular object on the floor. We need to transfer this visual anchor into a meaningful semantic embedding. We encode the VLM’s generalized textual description into its embedding set Et =

Embed lang (text ) and extract dense per-pixel embeddings 

Ep = Embed vision (image ) from the narration image. We compute similarity scores sp = sim (Et, Ep) between the VLM text embedding and each pixel embedding, identifying hotspots corresponding to visually grounded concepts. Using these similarity scores as weights, we compute a weighted average over all pixel embeddings to obtain a richer, contex-tually grounded embedding. This embedding is stored and then used for re-identification. 

sp = sim (Et, Ep), e =

P 

> p

spEp

P 

> p

sp

. (3) Upon estimating this embedding, we use it to localize the cause object of the anomaly corresponding to the narration as shown in Fig. 4. We extract the segmentation masks and segment these in our voxel map, getting accurate 3D voxel-level localization for the perceived cause of danger. If we see the cause again in future observations, identified by high 

sim (Et, . ) with the embeddings in Ωt, masks are extracted to localize these as well. 

D. Semantic Adversity Association and Characterization 

We model the predictive effect of a hazard on the agent by learning how different adversities manifest in downstream tracking error (or other adversity signals) as discussed before. Kernel Regression is a natural choice for characterizing these behaviours [25]. By grounding adversity causes in voxel-centric semantic maps and deferring model fitting to the slow loop, DFM2 reframes adversities as valuable signals: disturbances that can be captured, generalized, and reused to improve future resilience. 

1) Voxel-Centric Kernel Regression: We model adversity at the voxel level, where each semantic voxel encodes the local effect on the robot’s pose. The deviation at a query position x is predicted as a weighted sum of voxel contri-butions: let V be the set of voxels whose cosine similarity to the cause embedding exceeds 0.5. The overall disturbance model is obtained by optimizing the superposed contribution of all voxel-level kernels in V to match the observed track-ing error. By enforcing identical kernels across voxels, we frame this as a constrained optimization problem that treats adversities as transferable behaviors. We employ anisotropic RBF kernels: their locality confines each voxel’s influence spatially, while the anisotropic extension captures directional robot-environment interactions. Let V denote the set of semantic voxels associated with a hazard, with centers cj ∈ R3. For a query position x ∈ R3,the disturbance in space is modeled as 

f (x) = A X

> j∈V

exp  − 12 Qℓ(x − cj ) + b, (4) where A, b ∈ R are regression parameters, and Qℓ(·) is an anisotropic quadratic form 

Qℓ(x − cj ) = (x − cj )2 

> x

+ ( x − cj )2

> y

ℓ2

> xy

+ (x − cj )2

> z

ℓ2

> z

. (5) Here, ℓxy , ℓ z > 0 are horizontal and vertical length-scales that govern disturbance spread. Given trajectory tracking errors d(xi) along the planned path, we fit (A, b, ℓ xy , ℓ z ) by minimizing 

min J = min  

> ℓxy ,ℓ z

1

N

> N

X

> i=1

 d(xi) − f (xi)2 (6) The non-convex optimization of Equation 6 is solved using the L-BFGS-B algorithm [26] with a multi-start strategy to mitigate local minima. This voxel-centric kernel regression using a multi start L-BFGS-B solver yields fine-grained, geometry-aware fields that generalize across hazards of vary-ing size and pose (e.g., large versus small fans), while retaining computational efficiency. Parameters learned for one hazard instance (V, A, b, l xy , l z ) are stored in the danger library with the semantic embedding of the cause. The characterization for some of the causes is shown in Fig. 4 

2) Epistemic Uncertainty Estimation: While the voxel-centric kernel regression defined in Equation 4-5 provides a robust mean approximation of a disturbance, it is completely deterministic. For a robot traversing a hazard at 1.0 m/s with a 15 Hz pose estimator, the resulting 15 –20 samples are insufficient for full Gaussian Process posterior propagation or heteroscedastic modelling with full covariance modelling. To ensure safety, we must quantify the epistemic uncertainty 

loosely defined as the uncertainty due to lack of data.We keep the uncertainty estimation tractable by leveraging our seman-tic prior: we assume the spatial shape of the disturbance (governed by length-scales ℓxy , ℓ z ) is fixed by the object class, while its intensity (amplitude A and bias b) is treated as uncertain. This allows us to reformulate the problem as Bayesian Linear Regression (BLR) over a fixed basis. We define a feature vector ϕ(x) consisting of the superposed “shape template” ϕker and a bias term: 

ϕ(x) = 

ϕker (x)1



,ϕker (x) = X

> j∈V

exp 



− 12 Qℓ(x − cj )

 (7) The unknown parameters are the weights w = [ A, b ]⊤.Instead of finding a single point estimate for w, we compute the posterior covariance Σw. By assuming an uninformative prior ( Σp → ∞ )—reflecting the robot’s lack of a priori knowledge regarding the magnitude of a novel hazard—the weight covariance reduces to: 

Σw = σ2

> n

(Φ⊤Φ)−1 (8) where Φ is the design matrix of collected observations and 

σ2 

> n

is the aleatoric noise variance, estimated online from the residuals of the least-squares fit. The predictive variance at any query state x∗ is then the sum of irreducible noise and the parameter uncertainty projected into the feature space: 

σ2(x∗) = σ2

> n

|{z} 

> Aleatoric

+ ϕ(x∗)⊤Σwϕ(x∗)

| {z }

> Epistemic

(9) In regions where the shape template predicts a strong disturbance (near the hazard) but data is scarce, the uncer-tainty in A is amplified, causing the safety margin to expand conservatively. Conversely, where the template is zero (far from the hazard), the uncertainty collapses to the ambient noise level, preventing false positives. V. E VALUATION 

A. Hypotheses 

Hypothesis 1: An experience-driven disturbance library captures edge-case disturbances that may be otherwise missed, leading to higher survival rate. 

Hypothesis 2: An event-driven VLM querying mechanism mitigates over-conservativeness of preemptive libraries, lead-ing to faster arrival times and shorter path lengths. 

Hypothesis 3: Characterizing the disturbance’s spatial im-pact, rather than just treating semantics as binary obstacles, leads to more effective downstream planning. 

Hypothesis 4: DFM2’s flexible definition of an adversity signal demonstrates applicability across qualitatively distinct failure modes and across multiple robot embodiments and navigation stacks. B. Metrics 

To comprehensively evaluate the performance of DFM2 and the baselines across our hypotheses, we define the following metrics:  

> •

Arrival Time ( Tarr ) 

> •

Total Path Length ( Lpath ) 

> •

Survival Rate ( Rsurv )Fig. 4: Map with Voxel centric characterization in space for (a) Window (b) Vents and (c) Fan causing a mobile drone robot to drift. White corresponds to safe voxels, red corresponds to unsafe voxel, disturbance field is estimated around the unsafe voxels shown in red  

> •

Semantic Precision (Prec.)  

> •

Mean Reciprocal Rank (MRR): A measure of the ranking quality of the identified causes, computed as MRR = 1

M

> M

X

> j=1

1

rank j

, (10) where rank j is the position of the first ground-truth cause in the predicted list for trial j. This metric rewards the system for prioritizing the true cause of a disturbance at the top of its hypothesis list.  

> •

Normalized Cumulative Disturbance ( ¯Dcum ): To quantify the total tracking error experienced during a mission, we compute the cumulative deviation between the observed trajectory τobs and the reference trajectory 

τref , normalized by the nominal path length: 

¯Dcum = 1

Lnom 

> N

X

> i=1

∥τobs (ti) − τref (ti)∥2 · ∆t, (11) where Lnom is the length of the nominal (disturbance-free) reference trajectory and ∆t is the sampling inter-val. 

C. Baselines 

We compare against 3 baselines that ablate key design choices: semantic grounding, library construction strategy (preemptive vs. experience-driven), and disturbance charac-terization. 

DROAN-GL (Pure Geometric): A pure geometric plan-ner that performs obstacle avoidance using voxel-projected occupancy from depth sensors, with no semantic querying 

Fig. 5: (a) Preemptive Hazard Anticipation, each colour is a distinct semantic label deemed to be unsafe with the sphere radii reflecting the clearance radius around it causing the path to swerve over every such sphere (b) DFM2-Avoid showcasing the avoidance regions around the unsafe semantics, curling the path around and below the spheres (c) DFM2 showcasing the characterization and the execute path, wherein the drone reverse upon the first adversary identi-fication, flew over and avoided the other similar semantic instance as well. or disturbance characterization. This is a GPU accelerated version based on [27]. All baselines leverage DROAN-GL for path tracking and obstacle avoidance. The DROAN optimization objective can easily be modified to achieve the desired effect with different cost functions. 

Pro-Active Hazard Reasoning: Following LaC [7] and Ganai et al. [5], we implement a preemptive baseline using NARadio-based language-embedding similarity lifted to a 3D navigation costmap. We also include Pro-Active-Avoid ,which queries the VLM for required clearance and constructs spherical avoidance regions around grounded semantics. 

D. Ablations 

DFM2-Avoid Fixed Radius: Uses the experience-driven danger library but replaces disturbance characterization with a fixed spherical avoidance radius. Tested at 1.5m (DFM2-Avoid-1.5) and 2.5m (DFM2-Avoid-2.5) to isolate the con-tribution of adaptive spatial modeling (H3). 

DFM2 (Full Method): Combines VLM-based grounding, experience-driven library construction, and voxel-centric dis-turbance characterization. To ensure consistency, all methods share the same low-level controller and collision-avoidance stack. TABLE I: Comparison of baselines and ablations. Each row systematically isolates different components to validate our core hypotheses.                                      

> Method 3D Proj. Semantic Semantic Disturbance Planner Grounding Querying Characterization
> DROAN-GL ✓Voxel proj. None ×Traj. Library Pro-Active Hazard Reasoning ✓Voxel proj. Pre-emptive ✓Traj Library Pro-Active-Avoid ✓Voxel proj. Pre-emptive ×Traj Library DFM2-Avoid Fixed Radius=2.5 ✓Voxel proj. Exp.-driven ×Traj. Library DFM2-Avoid Fixed Radius=1.5 ✓Voxel proj. Exp.-driven ×Traj. Library
> DFM2 (Ours) ✓Voxel proj. Exp.-driven ✓Traj. Library

TABLE II: Causal attribution across VLMs: DFM2 post-hoc mechanism vs. anticipative querying.                    

> Mechanism Model Prec. (%) ( ↑)MRR (↑)O˙p (↓)Post-hoc (DFM2) GPT-4o-mini 75.0 0.94 2.7 o4-mini (CoT) 85.7 0.96 1.6 Sonnet 4.5 65.7 0.88 2.4 Gemini 2.5 F. 82.9 0.94 1.9

VI. S IMULATION EXPERIMENTS 

A. E1: Cause Reasoning 

We evaluate event-driven causal attribution against tradi-tional anticipative querying (every 4s). We curated a dataset of aerial and wheeled robotic failures across cluttered and sparse environments. In a 40s episode, anticipative querying generates 30–40 potential hazards; with a singular root cause, this yields precision < 5% . In contrast, the DFM2 mechanism isolates the disturbance event before querying the VLM. Among the models tested in Table II, o4-mini (CoT) achieved the highest performance (0.96 MRR), demonstrating that “Chain-of-Thought” reasoning is beneficial for pruning irrel-evant visual artifacts. Notably, Gemini 2.5 Flash emerged as the most efficient non-reasoning model, providing a precision of 82 .9% while maintaining a low output count (Op = 1 .9) .These results suggest that current VLMs can provide reliable semantic attribution when the search space is constrained to a localized temporal failure window. 

B. E2: Simulation 

We implement our simulation using NVIDIA Isaac Sim [28], which provides realistic PhysX-based physics and photorealism. 

Robot Dynamics, Control, and Perception: We simulate a flying quadrotor. To simulate the dynamics of a quadrotor robot, we use the Isaac Pegasus extension [29]. Pegasus simu-lates forces and torques from each propeller to drive the body mass while outputting sensor data to PX4 [30]. For quadrotor control, we implement our own software stack, AirStack , that sends velocity and yaw control commands ( vx, v y , v z , ω ) to the PX4 controller. The robot uses RGB-D camera sensors (360 ×480). We simulate physical disturbances (fans, vents, windows) using Isaac Sim’s force-field APIs. 

Fig. 6: The warehouse environment in IsaacSim with six possible aisle paths for the robot to navigate through. Our scenario script randomizes the placement of different types of fan disturbances in the different aisles. 

Experimental Setup: Experiments run in a modular ware-house (IsaacSim assets) with seven aisles and an open area (Fig. 6). We spawn 2–3 disturbance sources per aisle with randomized orientations. The drone must traverse an aisle to reach a goal, with racks of dense semantic clutter flanking each aisle to challenge causal attribution. We run 25 randomized navigation trials each lasting >30s. 

C. Results 

We show the quantitative results of randomized control trials in Table V, Table III and Table IV. DFM2 consistently outperforms all baselines in survival rate and cumulative disturbance, validating H1–H3. DROAN-GL crashes most frequently without semantic awareness; preemptive methods improve safety but suffer over-conservatism (H2). Against binary ablations (DFM2-A VOID -1.5/2.5), DFM2’s contin-uous disturbance fields (H3) enable emergent behaviors— stopping, reversing, and rerouting around hazards—rather than blind persistence, as shown in Fig. 5. VII. H ARDWARE EXPERIMENTS 

The simulation experiments validate DFM2 against exter-nal physical disturbances. We now present a different kind of adversity: perception-induced localization degradation, wherein the robot’s internal state estimator is compromised by environmental visual properties rather than external forces. This failure mode is common in the real world and interesting because (i) it produces no external observable drift until TABLE III: Baselines on successful trials . Bold = best. ↑ higher is better, ↓ lower is better. Averaged over 25 trials. 

Method Arrival Time 

Tarr (s) ↓

Path Length 

Lpath (m) ↓

Survival 

Rsurvive (%) ↑

Cum. Disturbance (m) ↓

Norm. Cum. Disturbance (cm) ↓

DROAN-GL 30.2 ± 3.89 31.7 ± 8.7 40.9 10.3 ± 9.4 31.4 ± 28.5 Pro-Active 31.4 ± 3.33 34.0 ± 10.9 59.1 8.0 ± 6.92 22.06 ± 18.25 Pro-Active-Avoid 31.5 ± 3.30 33.4 ± 11.4 54.5 10.2 ± 10.84 24.3 ± 22.2 

DFM2 (Ours) 31.04 ± 3.68 29.3 ± 6.5 81.8 2.9 ± 4.8 9.2 ± 13.68 

TABLE IV: Ablations on successful trials . Bold = best. ↑ higher is better, ↓ lower is better. Averaged over 25 trials. 

Method Arrival Time 

Tarr (s) ↓

Path Length 

Lpath (m) ↓

Survival 

Rsurvive (%) ↑

Cum. Disturbance (m) ↓

Norm. Cum. Disturbance (cm) ↓

DFM2-Avoid-1.5 33.2 ± 4.56 36.4 ± 11.8 68.2 12.9 ± 12.2 11.5 ± 36.15 DFM2-Avoid-2.5 33.9 ± 4.83 33.2 ± 9.6 72.7 7.4 ± 12.5 18.8 ± 30.63 

DFM2 (Ours) 31.04 ± 3.68 29.3 ± 6.5 81.8 2.9 ± 4.8 9.2 ± 13.68 

TABLE V: Baselines and ablations on failed trials . ↑ higher is better, ↓ lower is better. Averaged over 25 trials.                                                             

> Method Time to Fail
> Tf(s) ↓
> Path Length
> Lpath (m) ↓
> Collisions
> Ncontact (count) ↓
> DROAN-GL 32.8 ±6.6 44.7 ±12.8 1.8 ±1.2 Pro-Active 31.2 ±7.04 43.5 ±13.1 1.1 ±0.8 Pro-Active-Avoid 32.4 ±5.00 43.1 ±7.72 1.1 ±0.8 DFM2-Avoid-1.5 33.0 ±6.71 41.9 ±9.7 1.4 ±1.9 DFM2-Avoid-2.5 34.1 ±8.36 40.8 ±8.7 0.8 ±0.9 DFM2 (Ours) 29.1 ±5.61 32.2 ±11.2 0.6 ±0.7

catastrophic drift occurs, and (ii) it is highly embodiment-specific, the same surface that destroys RGBD odometry is irrelevant to a LiDAR-inertial system. We validate Hypothe-sis 4 (H4) by deploying DFM2 on a wheeled mobile robot under two such failure modes to evaluate whether DFM2 generalizes across robotic embodiments, navigation stack and disturbance modality. In contrast to wind fields, terrain interaction, or contact forces, the disturbances studied in this section originate from degradation within the perception and localization pipeline itself wherein the robot gets “fooled” into believing it has moved. To evaluate this setting, we deploy DFM2 on a wheeled mobile robot equipped with an Intel RealSense D455 RGBD camera, a Velodyne VLP32 LiDAR, and an Xsens IMU. The platform performs local navigation using the Dynamic Window Approach (DWA) [31] with laser scan based col-lision avoidance augmented with DFM2-derived disturbance costs, used through a simple artificial potential field (APF) [32] formulation for adaptation. We evaluate DFM2 using the RTAB-Map RGBD-Inertial Odometry pipeline [1], which combines feature-based visual correspondence estimation, RGBD geometric constraints, IMU-assisted motion predic-tion, and local graph optimization for pose tracking. Because pose estimation depends directly on the quality and spatial 

Fig. 7: Differential drive wheeled mobile robot platform with 2x Realsense D455, Velodyne VLP32 and Xsens IMU + GPS running the complete stack on a commercial laptop distribution of tracked visual correspondences, the system is particularly sensitive to perceptual degradation such as textureless surfaces and infrared overexposure, which reduce feature observability, destabilize frame-to-frame matching. We study two commonly observed but often under-characterized real-world perception failures:  

> •

Textureless Surface Degeneration: Large textureless surfaces reduce the number of reliable visual correspon-dences available to RGBD odometry systems, producing unstable tracking and increased estimator uncertainty. We induce this failure mode using large feature-deprived sheets positioned near turning regions in narrow cor-ridors, where localization behavior depends strongly Fig. 8: Featureless surfaces demonstration with black sheet, a) 3D DFM2 characterization b) 2D Occupancy grid overlay with DWA primitives c) Keypoint extraction for matching, we see keypoints at almost every part except the black surface, the black surfaces provides negligible features to be used by the VIO backbone (Red to Violet decreasing intensity) on viewpoint and field-of-view occupancy rather than obstacle distance alone.  

> •

Infrared Sensor Overexposure: Active infrared RGBD sensors are susceptible to strong illumination and IR interference, resulting in degraded depth observations and unstable odometry estimation. We reproduce this phenomenon by exposing the RealSense D455 sensor to high-intensity illumination from a pocket torch during operation. We monitor the trace of the pose covariance matrix Tr (Σ) 

as the adversity signal in place of position tracking error, since perception-induced failures manifest in estimator un-certainty before producing observable trajectory drift. The disturbance model f (x) characterizes the spatial distribution of this covariance inflation. The detection threshold θ is calibrated identically via disturbance-free runs, preserving the same pipeline structure as the simulation setting. Across both scenarios, DFM2 detects and spatially characterizes localized perceptual degradation before substantial trajectory drift becomes externally observable, giving us a rich char-acterization where avoidance is not just simple hardcoded clearances, capturing richer dependencies that are a func-tion of distances, adversity size and intensity. The planner adapts its motion behavior to reduce exposure to perceptually degraded regions, indirectly improving feature observability and estimator stability during navigation. We compare DFM2 against the DWA planner for the best qualitative analysis 

Fig. 9: Overexposure demonstration, a) 3D DFM2 Character-ization b) 2D Occupancy grid overlay with DWA primitives c) Setup with realsense facing the bright torch head-on (Red to Violet decreasing intensity) as the avoid mechanisms almost always miss the cause or produce infeasible trajectories within the narrow corridor which is just 2.5m wide, while the robot track width is 0.4m. Pro-Active-Avoid constructs spherical avoidance regions of radius 0.75-2.5m around detected semantics making naviga-tion geometrically infeasible without manual radius tuning specific to this environment which defeats the purpose of this work. All onboard computation was performed on a consumer-grade laptop equipped with an octa-core Ryzen 7 5600X CPU, 16GB RAM, and an RTX 3060 GPU, running the complete perception, planning, and control stack in real-time with all the sensors. 

A. Evaluation Metrics 

Unlike the simulation experiments, perception-driven fail-ures in real-world systems often emerge before significant trajectory drift becomes externally observable. We therefore evaluate localization health using internal estimator consis-tency metrics in addition to qualitative navigation behavior.  

> •

Inlier Ratio (Rinlier ): Measures the fraction of geo-metrically consistent feature correspondences used by the odometry backend: 

Rinlier = Ninlier 

Nmatches 

(12) Lower values indicate degraded visual observability and unstable tracking. TABLE VI: Transfer axes validated across DFM2 experiments.                 

> Adversity Mode Quadrotor (AirStack) Wheeled Robot (DWA)
> External Physical ✓Sim + HW —(wind, fans, vents) (H1–H3) Perception Pipeline Failure —✓Hardware (textureless, IR overexposure) (H4) Danger Library Transfer ✓Sim ✓Hardware (re-encounter, new instance) (H1) (H4)

Fig. 10: Narrow corridor with both adversity modes, robot in black and adversity modes in red, traversable region in green in a mapped standard office space  

> •

Pose Covariance Trace (Tr(Σ)) : Measures estimator uncertainty using the trace of the pose covariance matrix reported by the odometry system: 

Tr(Σ) = X

> i

Σii (13) Higher covariance indicates reduced estimator confi-dence and localization instability.  

> •

Degradation Duration (Tdeg ): Measures cumulative time spent in degraded localization states, determined using covariance thresholding and tracking instability indicators. 

B. Results 

The results in Table VII demonstrate that DFM2 improves localization robustness under perception degradation caused TABLE VII: Hardware evaluation under perception degra-dation caused by large textureless surfaces during turning maneuvers. Bold = best. ↑ higher is better, ↓ lower is better. Averaged over 40 successful trials.                       

> Method Inlier Ratio ↑
> Cov. Trace ↓
> Degradation Time (s) ↓
> DWA 0.28 ±0.23 2.60 ±2.23 8.33 ±7.62
> DWA + DFM2 0.45 ±0.20 1.04 ±1.75 3.70 ±6.66

by large textureless regions validating H4. This hypothesis is the most architecturally significant of the four. H1–H3 establish that DFM2 works; H4 establishes why it works across contexts. A wheeled robot experiencing localization drift from a textureless surface and a quadrotor experiencing trajectory deviation from a wind field are, from DFM2’s perspective, identical events. Compared to baseline DWA navigation, DFM2 maintains a substantially higher feature correspondence inlier ratio while simultaneously reducing pose covariance inflation and cumulative localization fail-ure duration. Qualitatively, the baseline planner frequently approaches feature-deprived regions too aggressively during turning maneuvers, resulting in unstable tracking and in-termittent odometry degradation. In contrast, DFM2 adapts robot motion to reduce exposure to perceptually degraded viewpoints, indirectly improving visual observability and estimator stability before catastrophic localization failure occurs. VIII. LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK 

One of the main concerns with DFM2 remains its reliance on the visual observability of a failure cause. While there are a handful of scenarios where DFM2 could identify the closest visual indicator, for example a wet floor where the wet patch is not visible the characterization can be learnt for the “do not slip” sign kept at the center of the puddle, this reliance on vision is a limiting factor. The reliance on a single VLM for cause association is a limiting factor, although the current models show great promise at identifying these hazards, fallbacks and causality based verification could be a next step. Future advances in multimodal reasoning models may further improve attribution robustness. Additionally, attribut-ing adversities from a single encounter is brittle in cluttered scenes; accumulating evidence across multiple interactions and applying causal reasoning to arbitrate among competing hypotheses would improve attribution reliability. DFM2’s engineered, disjoint modules may introduce compounding failure modes at module boundaries and limit joint optimiza-tion; end-to-end learning approaches that tightly couple per-ception, causal reasoning, and disturbance modeling within a unified differentiable framework represent a natural next step. Several directions remain open for future work including experimenting with different indicators for adversity. IX. C ONCLUSION 

We present Don’t Fool Me Twice (DFM2), a framework for continual, experience-driven adaptation to embodiment-specific adversities in unstructured environments. By cou-pling event-driven kinematic narration with semantic voxel-centric kernel regression, DFM2 attributes online distur-bances to causal semantics, characterizes their spatial extent, and proactively plans around them upon re-encounter. Across 25 randomized simulation trials, DFM2 achieves an 81.8% survival rate and reduces cumulative disturbance by more than 3x relative to the next best method, validating all four core hypotheses. Our framework has been validated across diverse adversity modes and an interesting application is traversability estimation where costmaps can be learnt with our characterization. X. A CKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

We would like to thank the folks at the AirLab at Carnegie Mellon University and the Autonomous Systems Lab at IIT Madras for their contributions to the ideation and development of this framework. We would also like to thank Dr John Dolan and Ms Rachel Burcin for facilitating the RISS program and their continued support. We greatly appreciate helpful discussions with Jay Patrikar, Jay Karhade, Andrea Bajcsy and the Intent Lab. Finally we thank Sayooj Raveendran, Satyam Singh, Dipshikha Hazari, John Keller, Seungjae Baek, and AirLab’s small drone team for help with systems deployment. This work at CMU was supported by the Defense Science and Technology Agency (DSTA) 

#DST000EC124000205 contract. REFERENCES [1] M. Labb´ e and F. Michaud, “Rtab-map as an open-source lidar and visual simultaneous localization and mapping library for large-scale and long-term online operation,” Journal of Field Robotics ,vol. 36, no. 2, p. 416–446, Oct. 2018. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/rob.21831 [2] C. Campos, R. Elvira, J. J. G. Rodriguez, J. M. M. Montiel, and J. D. Tardos, “Orb-slam3: An accurate open-source library for visual, visual–inertial, and multimap slam,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics ,vol. 37, no. 6, p. 1874–1890, Dec. 2021. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TRO.2021.3075644 [3] R. Nagata, K. Koide, K. Ikeda, O. Sako, S. Horie, and K. Yoshioka, “Mirrordrift: Actuated mirror-based attacks on lidar slam,” 2026. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.11364 [4] D. Damodaran, S. Mozaffari, S. Alirezaee, and M. J. Ahamed, “Experimental analysis of the behavior of mirror-like objects in lidar-based robot navigation,” Applied Sciences , vol. 13, no. 5, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.mdpi.com/2076-3417/13/5/2908 [5] M. Ganai, R. Sinha, C. Agia, D. Morton, and M. Pavone, “Real-time out-of-distribution failure prevention via multi-modal reasoning,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.10547 [6] R. Sinha, A. Elhafsi, C. Agia, M. Foutter, E. Schmerling, and M. Pavone, “Real-time anomaly detection and reactive planning with large language models,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https: //arxiv.org/abs/2407.08735 [7] M. Oh, C. Kim, S.-W. Seo, and S.-W. Kim, “Language as cost: Proactive hazard mapping using vlm for robot navigation,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.03138 [8] N. Jongwiriyanurak, Z. Zeng, J. M. Goo, X. Wang, I. Ilyankou, K. Sriroongvikrai, N. Christie, M. Wang, H. Chen, and J. Haworth, “V-roast: Visual road assessment. can vlm be a road safety assessor using the irap standard?” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.10872 [9] T. Chakraborty, U. Ghosh, A. E. Gongora, R. Glatt, Y. Dong, J. Li, A. K. Roy-Chowdhury, and C. Song, “Toward autonomous laboratory safety monitoring with vision language models: Learning to see hazards through scene structure,” 2026. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.00414 [10] C. Simpkins, “System identification: Theory for the user, 2nd edition (ljung, l.; 1999) [on the shelf],” Robotics & Automation Magazine, IEEE , vol. 19, pp. 95–96, 06 2012. [11] C. E. Rasmussen and C. K. I. Williams, Gaussian Processes for Machine Learning . The MIT Press, 11 2005. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/3206.001.0001 [12] M. P. Deisenroth and J. W. Ng, “Distributed gaussian processes,” 2015. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1502.02843 [13] D. Andrade and A. Takeda, “Robust Gaussian process regression with the trimmed marginal likelihood,” in Proceedings of the Thirty-Ninth Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence , ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, R. J. Evans and I. Shpitser, Eds., vol. 216. PMLR, 31 Jul–04 Aug 2023, pp. 67–76. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v216/andrade23a.html [14] A. Garbuno-Inigo, F. A. DiazDelaO, and K. M. Zuev, “Gaussian process hyper-parameter estimation using parallel asymptotically independent markov sampling,” 2016. [Online]. Available: https: //arxiv.org/abs/1506.08010 [15] J. Kocijan, A. Girard, B. Banko, and R. Murray-Smith, “Dynamic systems identification with gaussian processes,” Mathematical and Computer Modelling of Dynamical Systems , vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 411–424, 2005. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1080/ 13873950500068567 [16] M. Faessler, A. Franchi, and D. Scaramuzza, “Differential flatness of quadrotor dynamics subject to rotor drag for accurate tracking of high-speed trajectories,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters ,vol. 3, no. 2, p. 620–626, Apr. 2018. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/LRA.2017.2776353 [17] S. T. O’Callaghan and F. T. Ramos, “Gaussian process occupancy maps*,” The International Journal of Robotics Research , vol. 31, pp. 42 – 62, 2012. [Online]. Available: https://api.semanticscholar.org/ CorpusID:34447821 [18] C. Finn, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine, “Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation of deep networks,” 2017. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1703.03400 [19] A. Nagabandi, I. Clavera, S. Liu, R. S. Fearing, P. Abbeel, S. Levine, and C. Finn, “Learning to adapt in dynamic, real-world environments through meta-reinforcement learning,” 2019. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1803.11347 [20] Y. Long, K. Chen, L. Jin, and M. Shang, “Drae: Dynamic retrieval-augmented expert networks for lifelong learning and task adaptation in robotics,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.04661 [21] O. Alama, A. Bhattacharya, H. He, S. Kim, Y. Qiu, W. Wang, C. Ho, N. Keetha, and S. Scherer, “Rayfronts: Open-set semantic ray frontiers for online scene understanding and exploration,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.06994 [22] K. Museth, J. Lait, J. Johanson, J. Budsberg, R. Henderson, M. Alden, P. Cucka, D. Hill, and A. Pearce, “Openvdb: an open-source data structure and toolkit for high-resolution volumes,” in ACM SIGGRAPH 2013 Courses , ser. SIGGRAPH ’13. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2013. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/2504435.2504454 [23] M. Ranzinger, G. Heinrich, J. Kautz, and P. Molchanov, “Am-radio: Agglomerative vision foundation model – reduce all domains into one,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.06709 [24] X. Zhai, B. Mustafa, A. Kolesnikov, and L. Beyer, “Sigmoid loss for language image pre-training,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.15343 [25] M. Sivaprakasam, S. Triest, C. Ho, S. Aich, J. Lew, I. Adu, W. Wang, and S. Scherer, “Salon: Self-supervised adaptive learning for off-road navigation,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/ abs/2412.07826 [26] D. C. Liu and J. Nocedal, “On the limited memory bfgs method for large scale optimization,” Mathematical programming , vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 503–528, 1989. [27] G. Dubey, R. Madaan, and S. Scherer, “Droan - disparity-space representation for obstacle avoidance: Enabling wire mapping &avoidance,” in 2018 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) . IEEE Press, 2018, p. 6311–6318. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/IROS.2018.8593499 [28] NVIDIA, “Isaac Sim.” [Online]. Available: https://github.com/ isaac-sim/IsaacSim [29] M. Jacinto, J. Pinto, J. Patrikar, J. Keller, R. Cunha, S. Scherer, and A. Pascoal, “Pegasus simulator: An isaac sim framework for multiple aerial vehicles simulation,” in 2024 International Conference on Unmanned Aircraft Systems (ICUAS) . IEEE, 2024, p. 917–922. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICUAS60882. 2024.10556959 [30] L. Meier, D. Honegger, and M. Pollefeys, “Px4: A node-based multithreaded open source robotics framework for deeply embedded platforms,” in 2015 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 2015, pp. 6235–6240. [31] D. Fox, W. Burgard, and S. Thrun, “The dynamic window approach to collision avoidance,” IEEE Robotics & Automation Magazine , vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 23–33, 1997. [32] M. C. Lee and M. G. Park, “Artificial potential field based path planning for mobile robots using a virtual obstacle concept,” in 

Proceedings 2003 IEEE/ASME International Conference on Advanced Intelligent Mechatronics (AIM 2003) , vol. 2, 2003, pp. 735–740 vol.2.