Optimal Transport for Efficient, Unsupervised
Anomaly Detection on Industrial Data
Abigail Langbridge
Dyson School of Design Engineering
Imperial College London*
United Kingdom
al4518@ic.ac.uk
Fearghal O’Donncha
AI for Sustainable Industry
IBM Research Europe
Dublin, Ireland
James T Rayfield
IBM T.J. Watson Research Center
IBM Research
NY, USA
Bradley Eck
AI for Sustainable Industry
IBM Research Europe
Dublin, Ireland
Abstract—Effective anomaly detection frameworks are a cen-
tral pillar of the Industry 4.0 paradigm. In this paper, we
introduce an Optimal Transport (OT)-based framework for
anomaly detection, designed to detect deviations from normal
behaviour in time-series sensor data. The OT-based method
requires minimal user input and adapts to real-time data without
the need for labelled training data. Our method effectively
addresses existing limitations related to data labelling, general-
isability, and scalability, demonstrating resilience against short-
term fluctuations, noise, and data gaps — common challenges
in industrial environments. Additionally, our method provides
counterfactual explanations improving the auditability of the
approach when deployed in industrial settings.
The proposed method learns the mapping between normal
and observed operating conditions through a sliding reference
window that adapts to the dynamicity of the data. We evaluate
our approach on three industrial datasets, from shipping, in-
dustrial HVAC systems, and publicly available benchmark data.
The method was highly effective in identifying anomalies and
reducing false positives, outperforming traditional methods, while
maintaining computational efficiency and ease of configuration.
Index Terms—Optimal transport, anomaly detection, XAI,
condition-based maintenance.
I. INTRODUCTION
Asset performance management (APM) is critical in modern
industrial contexts due to increasing automation and reliance
on high-cost equipment, necessitating well-planned mainte-
nance to optimize efficiency and reduce costs [1]. Many firms
still rely on calendar-based maintenance due to its simplicity,
but this can lead to the waste of significant remaining useful
© 2024 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from
IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media,
including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional
purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers
or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.
This is the accepted manuscript of A. Langbridge, F. O’Donncha, J. T.
Rayfield and B. Eck, “Optimal Transport for Efficient, Unsupervised Anomaly
Detection on Industrial Data,” in 2024 IEEE International Conference on
Big Data (BigData), Washington, DC, USA, 2024, pp. 2142–2151, doi:
https://doi.org/10.1109/BigData62323.2024.10825081.
*Work completed while at IBM Research Europe
life and increase the risk of unexpected breakdowns [2]. Ad-
vances in monitoring and analysis have promoted the adoption
of condition-based maintenance (CBM), which promises a
more effective and targeted scheduling framework. The goal of
CBM is to enhance equipment availability and efficiency, con-
trol deterioration rates, ensure safe and environmentally sound
operations, and minimise total operating costs. A proactive
CBM approach can yield substantial cost savings, including
up to a 12–20% reduction in maintenance costs and a 14%
reduction in safety risks [3].
The effective implementation of CBM depends on ac-
curately characterising the deterioration process and failure
severity, which are complicated by factors such as imperfect
condition monitoring and variability in deterioration thresh-
olds. Figure 1 presents an idealised P-F curve representing
the timeline from the point where a potential failure (P) is
first detectable in an asset to the point of functional failure (F).
The objective of condition monitoring is to identify the onset
of failure behaviour prior to the asset suffering deterioration.
Anomaly detection plays a crucial role in this framework by
identifying early signs of equipment failure or inefficiency, and
allowing for timely interventions.
Anomaly detection in industrial asset management presents
several significant challenges. These include the high vari-
ability in operating conditions, such as fluctuating loads,
temperatures, and environmental factors, which complicate the
identification of true anomalies. Additionally, a scarcity or
complete lack of labelled datasets for failure events, limits
the value supervised learning approaches. The complex be-
haviour of assets, driven by the interactions between various
components, further complicates anomaly detection. Noisy,
incomplete, or miscalibrated sensor data introduces additional
challenges, compounded by the need for real-time processing
to avoid operational disruptions. Interpreting detection results
accurately and scaling detection models across diverse assets
with varying operational contexts also remain critical chal-
lenges.
In practical customer settings, the requirements for anomaly
arXiv:2609.13940v1  [cs.LG]  12 Sep 2026


Fig. 1: P-F Curve illustrating the progression from potential
failure (P) to functional failure (F) in industrial assets. The
curve highlights key detection points for condition monitoring
and the opportunity window for predictive maintenance inter-
ventions to prevent total asset failure
detection solutions can be summarised as follows:
• Automation: Many industrial operations lack in-house
data science expertise, making it essential to have an au-
tomated, out-of-the-box anomaly detection solution that
can be easily deployed to IoT data streams and configured
with minimal effort. Additionally, many organisations do
not have access to labelled data for model training, further
underscoring the need for solutions that can operate effec-
tively in unsupervised or semi-supervised environments.
• Explainability: Customers need the capability to diag-
nose the root cause of an anomaly, with clear explanations
for the system’s decisions or recommendations, detailing
the reasoning behind them. Moreover, compliance with
safety regulations often mandates the ability to audit past
decisions, enabling users or auditors to trace and review
the factors and data that influenced a particular decision.
• Scalability: Modern industrial environments typically
encompass numerous assets distributed across multiple
buildings, sites, or locations, each with distinct environ-
mental characteristics and differing levels of sensor data
monitoring. Anomaly detection routines must be scalable,
functioning effectively even in conditions where data is
sparse or unevenly distributed.
In this paper, we present an Optimal Transport (OT)-based
framework for unsupervised anomaly detection on industrial
data, and demonstrate its effectiveness on three use cases
encompassing benchmark and industrial datasets. The pro-
posed method leverages optimal transport to map relationships
between expected and anomalous operating conditions from
time-series sensor data. This approach offers several key
contributions:
• Ease of Configuration: The method requires minimal
configuration — users only need to specify the lengths
of reference and test datasets for detection. We utilise
a sliding window approach that dynamically updates
reference datasets with the most recent data, ensuring
adaptability to changing conditions.
• Explainability: Leveraging the learned transport mapping,
the framework generates counterfactuals that assist users
in evaluating deviations from normal behaviour. This
helps diagnose root causes of anomalies and quantify
the deviation from expected behaviours, making the
method highly transparent and interpretable. We assess
the characteristics of the generated counterfactuals using
an industry dataset.
• Efficiency with Small Datasets: The method is highly ef-
ficient, requiring fewer than 150 data points for effective
training across diverse applications, as demonstrated in
our experiments. This makes it well-suited for industrial
applications with limited data, while minimising compu-
tational costs.
II. BACKGROUND
A. Time-Series Anomaly Detection
Anomaly detection is a well-studied problem across many
diverse industries and applications. Despite extensive research,
anomaly detection in time-series data remains a challenging
problem due to the unique issues it presents, such as noise,
missing labels, and concept drift [4]. Many prominent time-
series anomaly detection methods are context-specific [5]–
[7], require significant volumes of labelled data to train
[4]–[6], [8], or are not readily interpretable [7], [9], [10].
These limitations are exacerbated in industrial contexts by
the practical requirements for online detectors that can act
on massive volumes of data in near real time [9]. Combined
with a high degree of seasonality and drift, it’s clear that any
successful detector for time series data must be adaptive to
changing underlying trends, low-latency, and robust to false-
positives caused by noise or data quality issues. Emanating
from challenges around computational cost, interpretability,
and robustness, the majority of operational anomaly detection
systems are still rule-based [11].
While many approaches leverage deep learning for anomaly
detection [8], [9], these have limited utility in online settings
due to their computational complexity – both for training
and inference – and require at least some labelled anoma-
lous instances to train. Additionally, these methods are not
interpretable and require some post-hoc explanation.
The most fundamental anomaly detection methods are
distance- or density-based approaches such as k-nearest neigh-
bours (KNN). However these methods are sensitive to the
distance used, the value of hyperparameters and the local struc-
ture of data [12], [13]. The anomaly scores output from these
approaches are unbounded, which limits their interpretability.
[14], proposed an extension of distance-based approaches to
monitor system degradation. However, this was based on a
fixed reference period which limits its application to stationary
systems or those with well-labelled data.
Various adaptations of conformal prediction methods have
been proposed for anomaly detection [15], including KNN-
CAD which augments the KNN architecture with an inductive
measure of non-conformity which can be interpreted as an
anomaly score [7]. Similarly, [10] propose the Numenta HTM
detector that uses the prediction error from a temporal en-
coder/decoder architecture as their distance, and that provides


an interpretable anomaly score bounded between 0 and 1. The
main drawbacks of these approaches are their computational
complexity since the reference measures (the non-conformity
measure for KNN-CAD and HTM prediction for Numenta
HTM) must be updated with each iteration.
B. Explainable Anomaly Detection
While many works on anomaly detection focus solely on
the accuracy of detections, contemporary works increasingly
recognise explainability as a crucial aspect of performance
[16]. In this work, we use the terms explainability and inter-
pretability interchangeably to describe the operator’s overall
understanding of the model’s output.
Many simple models, such as rules, decision trees and linear
regression models, are inherently interpretable. However, it’s
important to note that this interpretability is not unbounded:
the size and number of concepts both limit the degree to which
explanations are human-comprehensible [17].
For models which aren’t interpretable, a number of post-hoc
explanation tools exist which produce local approximations
to black-box models [18]–[21]. Many of these methods are
tailored to high-dimensional prediction problems, where fea-
ture importance-based explanations are valuable. However, for
time-series anomaly detection problems additional information
on why the given feature is anomalous is valuable. The survey
[16] highlight a shortage of sample-based explanation tools
for providing this context.
C. Optimal Transport
Optimal transport is a powerful and flexible tool for com-
paring distributions. In the below section we introduce the
fundamentals of OT. For a more detailed treatment of the topic,
readers are directed to [22].
Considering the marginal probability measures µ and ν (on
domains X and Y respectively), we define the set of joint
distributions π ∈M(X × Y) where M is the set of probability
measures on the given product domain. The joint distribution
π∗is the distribution which (i) has µ and ν as its marginals,
and (ii) minimizes the expected cost of transporting the ‘mass’
from µ to ν under some cost function C : X × Y →R.
More formally, the optimal coupling under Kantorovich [23]
is defined:
π∗= arg
inf
π∈Π(µ,ν)
ZZ
C(x, y)π(x, y) dx dy
(1)
where
Π(µ, ν) ≡

π ∈M(X × Y) : Tx♯π = µ, Ty♯π = ν
	
.
and T is the push-forward operator such that Tx♯: M(X) 7→
M(Y) and vice versa.
If C ≡Lp
p, p ∈N+, the optimal plan π∗induces the
Wasserstein-p metric in the space M:
Wp(µ, ν)p =
inf
π∈Π(µ0,µ1)
ZZ
C(x, y)π(x, y) dx dy
(2)
Indeed, the Wasserstein distance has been used for several
works in anomaly detection across many domains, includ-
ing aerospace [24], particle physics [25], molecular biology
[26], and hyperspectral imaging [27]. However, these methods
rely on domain-specific parameterisations. One notable non-
parametric approach is presented in [28], where the Wasser-
stein barycenter of a set of reference signals is used to
determine whether some test signal is anomalous. Despite its
promise, a major drawback of optimal transport (OT) methods
for anomaly detection is their computational complexity. Both
classic and regularized OT approaches typically require poly-
nomial time, making them computationally demanding. [29],
[30].
The Wasserstein distance is a powerful tool for inher-
ently interpretable decision-making. The authors of [31],
[32] present an OT-based matching method that not only
provides inherent interpretability but also surpasses state-of-
the-art matching techniques on complex, heterogeneous legal
datasets. A number of works also use the Wasserstein distance
to evaluate the interpretability of data and predictive models
[33], [34]. The work [35] uses the machinery of optimal
transport to produce counterfactual explanations that respect
the underlying distributions of factual instances, rather than
considering data points independently.
III. METHOD
A. Anomaly Detection using Optimal Transport
Consider k sensors measuring some instrumented system at
regular time intervals. We define the past data X ∈R(nref×k)
from t −nref to the present time t. We then consider the
test data Y ∈R(ntest×k), the subsequent ntest measurements
to t + ntest. Since neither X nor Y are labelled, we cannot
directly use one or the other to evaluate the presence of
anomalies. However, since we can assume that anomalies are
sparse compared to normal system behaviour, the time-average
of X can be used as a benchmark of normal system behaviour.
Rather than storing and computing averages directly, we use a
buffer of historic Wasserstein distances to monitor the relative
evolution of X and Y.
1) Wasserstein Distances in One Dimension: Solving for
the Wasserstein distance between one-dimensional measures
is straightforward and highly efficient. This motivates our
univariate approach, where features are treated as independent
data streams for faults to be diagnosed from individually.
Considering a single feature k, with xk ∈X and yk ∈Y,
we can represent the reference and test data as uniform empir-
ical measures µk =
1
nref
Pnref
i
δxi,k and νk =
1
ntest
Pntest
j
δyj,k.
However, these are susceptible to small-sample errors where
outliers distort the empirical distribution. To reduce the impact
of these outliers on the resulting Wasserstein distance, we
instead consider the arithmetic mean of sorted sequential
observations xi,k ≤xi+1,k ∀1 ≤i ≤nref as in [36], such
that:
ˆµk =
1
nref −1
nref−1
X
i
δˆxi,k, where ˆxi,k ≡xi,k + xi+1,k
2
.
(3)


The definition of ˆνk over ˆyk follows.
Given the cumulative distribution function over ˆµk
CDFˆµk(x) ≡
Z x
−∞
dˆµk ∀x ∈R,
and its pseudoinverse, the generalised quantile function
CDF−1
ˆµk (r) ≡min
x {x ∈R : CDFˆµk(x) ≥r}∀r ∈[0, 1],
the 2-Wasserstein distance between ˆµk and ˆνk can be ex-
pressed ( [22], Remark 2.30):
W2(ˆµk, ˆνk)2 =
Z 1
0
CDF−1
ˆµk (r) −CDF−1
ˆνk (r)

2
dr.
(4)
In practice, since the reference data is larger than the test
data, the optimal mapping π∗associated with this distance is
a monotone rearrangement [22] (Remark 2.28), where the first
γ = nref−1
ntest−1 elements of ˆxk are mapped to ˆy1,k, the subsequent
γ elements to ˆy2,k, et cetera. Where γ /∈N, mass-splitting may
occur, such that ˆxi,k is mapped in part to both ˆyj,k and ˆyj+1,k.
2) Wasserstein Distance as an Anomaly Score: The Wasser-
stein distance W2(ˆµk, ˆνk)2 can be interpreted as a measure
of the anomalousness of yk with respect to xk. However,
this distance is heavily dependent on X being an accurate
representation of good system behaviour, and is unbounded
on R+ which makes it difficult to interpret. To make our
approach more robust, we construct a buffer of distances to act
as the memory of previous behaviour. The buffer D ∈Rnbuf×k
+
stores the nbuf most recent Wasserstein distances W2(ˆµk, ˆνk)2,
and informs a dynamic threshold for evaluating anomalous
behaviour.
In contrast to many other distance-based anomaly detectors,
which use empirical quantiles as detection thresholds [24],
[28], we adopt a t-statistic-based threshold,
zk = W2(ˆµk, ˆνk)2 −E(Dk)
σDk
(5)
where E(·) is the expectation, and σ the standard deviation,
of the distance buffer D. If zk is greater than some threshold
parameter, by default 3.5, then the period Y is flagged as
anomalous for the feature k. To ensure the persistence of
anomaly flags throughout anomalous periods, we freeze the
reference distribution ˆµk when an anomaly is flagged for that
feature. Once the anomalous period ends, the distribution is
updated based on the most recent reference data X. This slid-
ing window approach, combined with the dynamic threshold,
allows the method to adapt to slow-moving system changes,
such as seasonality or concept drift, without flagging them as
anomalous.
B. Optimal Transport-Based Counterfactual Explanations
To provide explanations for the generated anomaly flags,
we leverage the structure of the optimal mapping π∗. Since
π∗is a monotone mapping, there will be at least ⌈γ⌉parents
for each ˆyj,k, which form some continuous subset of ˆxk. The
counterfactual for any given ˆyj,k corresponds to the range of
these parents, and can be interpreted as the expected behaviour
of the system which the anomaly violates. This formulation
also generalises to queries y /∈ˆyk, provided y is drawn from
the same underlying distribution as ˆyk. For j such that ˆyj,k ≤
y ≤ˆyj+1,k, the counterfactual of y will be the range of the
parents of both ˆyj,k and ˆyj+1,k. This behaviour is critical for
monitoring the system after an anomaly has been flagged.
Using OT to provide explanations ensures that explanations
are faithful (since they are generated by the same mechanism
as the anomalies themselves) and factual (since explanations
must be drawn from the reference data). These two properties
are designed to improve operator trust in the detections and
their explanations, while providing insight into both the current
and expected system operation.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
A. Datasets
1) Digital Twin for Green Shipping (DT4GS): Shipping
is vital to global trade, facilitating the transportation of over
90% of goods. However, it also contributes to 3% of global
greenhouse gas emissions – emissions that have increased by
20% over the past decade [37]. Improving the efficiency of
the shipping industry is crucial for both economic security and
achieving environmental targets. Complicating this challenge
is an ageing global fleet. As of early 2023, the average ship
age was 22.2 years, with over half the fleet now older than
15 years. Many of these ships are too old to retrofit while
being too young to scrap [37]. Therefore, it is imperative
to harness digitalisation and technological advancements to
enhance efficiencies for the shipping industry.
A key pillar of improving efficiency is the real-time mon-
itoring of various components and systems on a ship, using
sensors and data analytics to assess their performance. The
primary goal is to detect early signs of wear, degradation,
or malfunction, enabling timely maintenance while preventing
unexpected failures [38]. Anomaly detection is essential in
this process, as it facilitates the early identification of po-
tential issues in machinery or systems before they escalate
into significant failures. Crucially, any actionable anomaly
detection approach must maintain a near-zero false positive
rate to ensure reliability and effectiveness [39].
In this study, we utilised real-world data from a 9-year-
old, 330-meter crude oil tanker vessel. While data were
collected from various ship components, this analysis focuses
specifically on sensor streams from the main engine, collected
every 15 minutes over a continuous 1-year period. Table I
outlines the data analysed, which focuses on the thermal
conditions, rotational speed, and air pressure within the en-
gine’s turbocharger system. These data streams offer valuable
insights into the turbocharger’s thermal and mechanical per-
formance, as well as the air pressure dynamics within the main
engine, allowing for an in-depth analysis of engine efficiency,
operational stability, and potential performance anomalies.
2) Benchmark Data: The Numenta Anomaly Benchmark
[10] provides 58 labelled time-series datasets designed to test
the performance of online anomaly detection approaches in
data-streaming settings. The benchmark datasets, many from


TABLE I: Summary of the sensor data analysed over the three case studies: a crude oil tanker ship, chiller data from a
Poughkeepsie data centre, and publicly available benchmark data extracted from the Numenta Anomaly Benchmark (https:
//github.com/numenta/NAB). Note that missing values include downtime for the HVAC system.
Case Study
Feature
Sampling Rate
Num. Values
Missing Values (%)
DT4GS Main Engine
Turbocharger inlet temperature (°C)
15 min
32,286
0.04
ME scavenging air pressure (Bar)
15 min
28,986
0.03
NAB Benchmark
Office temperature (°C)
5 min
22,696
0.0
Machine temp (°C)
60 min
7,268
0.0
Cluster CPU use (%)
5 min
18,051
0.0
Server CPU use (%)
5 min
4,033
0.0
HVAC System
Condenser water flow (L/min)
15 min
138,078
70.73
Chiller setpoint (°C)
15 min
138,078
46.79
Supply temperature (°C)
15 min
138,078
46.82
Return temperature (°C)
15 min
138,078
46.82
real-world applications, have varying sample frequency and
degrees of seasonality or concept drift. From this corpus, we
select the four real-world datasets with known anomaly causes
that most closely align with our application. These are detailed
in Table I.
3) Industrial HVAC systems: Heating, Ventilation, and Air
Conditioning (HVAC) systems are essential for maintaining
optimal environmental conditions and are widely used across
various industries, including manufacturing, data centres, com-
mercial buildings, and healthcare facilities. However, accu-
rately identifying anomalies in HVAC systems is challenging
due to their diverse configurations, complex operations, pro-
nounced seasonality, and the variety of building monitoring
systems that track performance [40]. The goal is to leverage
operational data collected from building automation systems,
sensors, and meters to automatically detect equipment and
control issues, as well as degrading performance in HVAC
systems, and to diagnose potential root causes [41].
In this study, we collected data every 15 minutes over
a 4-year period from a data centre in Poughkeepsie, NY,
focusing on a 15-year-old closed-loop water-cooled chiller
equipped with various IoT sensors, as summarized in Table
I. The data were sourced from the SkySpark1 IoT platform,
which continuously gathers information via live connections
to the site’s building management system. The gathered data
have significant periods missing due to a combination of
sensor faults and scheduled downtime, which are difficult to
distinguish from the collected data. We transform the raw
sensor data into a set of key performance indicators (KPIs),
including Delta Temperature, Delta Setpoint, and Cooling
Load. These KPIs offer a more nuanced understanding of the
chiller’s operation cognisant of variations in load. It enables
more accurate detection of performance issues and enhances
decision-making for maintenance and energy management.
B. Baselines and Evaluation Metrics
To evaluate the performance of our approach, we con-
sider the F1 score, precision and recall of detections against
windowed ground-truth labels. Using windowed labels rather
1SkySpark, SkyFoundry, 2019. https://skyfoundry.com/product
than an instantaneous ground truth allows us to reward both
early and late detections within some acceptable period of
the instantaneous anomaly. Where ground-truth labels are
unavailable, such as in our shipping case study, we consider
additional qualitative metrics based on desirable behaviour,
such as the density of detections and the robustness to sensor
fluctuations.
We explored two OT-based approaches, distinct in their
approach to thresholding, with the aim of reducing false
positives:
• OT-AD: data were flagged as anomalous if the Wasser-
stein distance between the observed data and reference
distribution was greater than 3.5 times the standard devi-
ation, as in Equation 5.
• OT-AD (Q99): data were flagged as anomalous if the
Wasserstein distance exceeded the 99th percentile of the
distance buffer.
We compare our performance to two unsupervised, online
detection methods: KNN-CAD [7], and Numenta HTM [10].
These methods were some of the top performers on the NAB
benchmark [10] and both are designed to perform on noisy,
real-world data.
We also consider the runtimes of detectors as a proxy for
computational complexity, a key deployment consideration.
Runtimes are reported based on an 36GB M3 Pro Macbook
Pro running Sonoma 14.6 and Python 3.12, using the Cython
implementation of the Wasserstein solver from [42]. All results
reported for Numenta HTM, including runtimes, are taken
from [10] due to its Python 2 dependency. Code to replicate
our experiments will be provided upon acceptance.
Since explanations are difficult to evaluate quantitatively,
we focus on a qualitative evaluation considering their faith-
fulness to the underlying data. We achieve this using a visual
diagnostic approach adapted for time-series data from [43].
V. RESULTS
A. Evaluation on DT4GS Data
We evaluated our results using one year of engine data. The
analysis focused on temperature and pressure data, allowing


Fig. 2: Anomalies detected over one year of engine data from a tanker ship, for the datasets main engine turbocharger air
inlet temperature (top) and main engine scavenging air pressure (bottom). The cyan-highlighted segments represent anomalies
identified by the benchmark KNN-CAD method, while the red-highlighted segments indicate anomalies detected by the proposed
optimal transport-based approach.
us to examine anomaly detection across datasets with distinct
characteristics:
• Main engine turbocharger air inlet temperature repre-
sents the temperature of the air entering the turbocharger
of the main engine. This data can exhibit variability due
to changes in engine load, ambient air temperature, and
operating conditions.
• Main engine scavenging air pressure refers to to the pres-
sure of the air supplied to the engine’s cylinders during
the scavenging process, where exhaust gases are expelled,
and fresh air is introduced for the next combustion cycle.
Variations in this pressure can indicate changes in engine
performance, such as clogged air filters, turbocharger
issues, or other mechanical problems affecting air intake.
Figure 2 showcases the anomalies detected in both datasets
using our OT-based method and the KNN-CAD approach from
[7]. For OT-AD, we set the parameters nref, ntest, nbuf all to
48, reflecting the expected anomalous behaviour of persistent
faults and resulting in a maximum reporting latency of 12h.
For KNN-CAD, we set the detection threshold to 0.99 to
reduce the number of detections to only the most extreme
anomalies as measured by its conformal model.
For the temperature data, our method identifies three sig-
nificant anomalous periods in January, April, and May. The
first anomaly is triggered by a sharp temperature drop from
approximately 34°C to as low as 16°C. Notably, our method
detects the anomaly as early as when the temperature falls
to 32.3°C, demonstrating its sensitivity and ability to identify
anomalies in their early stages.
The comparison in Figure 2 between the OT-AD detections
and those from the KNN-CAD implementation highlights key
advantages of our approach.
• The OT method demonstrates greater resilience to short-
term fluctuations, which are often the result of sensor er-
rors or data quality issues rather than true anomalies [44].
In contrast, KNN-CAD mistakenly flags such fluctuations
as anomalies, as seen in December 2023 and June 2024.
• The computational efficiency of our OT-AD method is
significantly higher. Processing both datasets, each with
approximately 30,000 data points, takes only 0.1 seconds
for the OT method, compared to 156.1 seconds for KNN-
CAD.


• The OT-AD method triggers far fewer anomalous events,
identifying just 3 anomalies for both the temperature
and pressure datasets, compared to 54 and 45 flagged
by KNN-CAD, reflecting a substantial reduction in false
positives.
B. Benchmarking on NAB
In order to achieve the best performance on the benchmark,
each method is tuned on each of the four real-world datasets
with a grid search conducted to find the parameters leading to
the highest F1 score.
The two temperature system datasets are challenging to
predict, as reflected by the low F1 scores across benchmark
approaches. The optimal thresholds for KNN-CAD are 0.5 and
0.05, and for Numenta HTM are 0.05 for both datasets. The
parameters for OT-AD were nref = 48, ntest = 24, nbuf = 56
and nref = 132, ntest = 126, nbuf = 48 respectively. Notably,
the precision of the two OT-based methods are consistently
high, representing a significantly lower proportion of false
positives compared to the other methods.
For the CPU utilisation data, the optimal parameters for
the OT-AD methods are parameters nref = 128, ntest = 64,
nbuf = 64, and the thresholds for KNN-CAD and Numenta
HTM are 0.4 and 0.1 respectively. The change in OT-AD
parameters here represents a shift to a different application
and different data – and anomaly – modalities. Similarly to
the temperature data, the OT-AD methods outperform the
baselines with respect to precision, and yield similar F1 scores
to the best-performing method, Numenta HTM. Notably, the
OT-AD approach is more than 10,000 times faster than this
method for just a five-percent performance drop.
Finally, on the request latency data we see a similar trend.
The OT-AD methods, with parameters nref = 18, ntest = 42,
nbuf = 42, achieve perfect precision with an overall F1 score of
just under 50%. The KNN-CAD (threshold 0.5) and Numenta
HTM (threshold 0.05) methods suffer from low precision
and low recall respectively, which affects their capacity for
deployment on this data.
C. Industrial HVAC Data
Based on the datastreams in Table I we calculate three KPIs
to detect anomalies in the chiller system’s performance:
• Delta Temperature is the chiller’s supply temperature
minus the temperature of water that arrives at the chiller.
Negative values here correspond to the chiller not doing
any cooling work.
• Delta Setpoint is the system setpoint minus the chiller’s
supply temperature as a measure of how performant the
unit is.
• Cooling Load is the cooling load on the chiller, estimated
as a function of Delta Temperature and the flow rate of
condenser water through the system.
Table III presents the results of OT-AD compared to the
baseline KNN-CAD method across these KPIs. The threshold
parameter for KNN-CAD is for each feature following a grid
search to maximise F1, and the OT-AD parameters are set to
TABLE II: Performance of our method, KNN-CAD [7], and
Numenta HTM [10] on four industrial datasets from the
Numenta Anomaly Benchmark repository.
Method
Precision
Recall
F1 Score
Runtime (s)
Ambient Temperature System Failure
OT-AD
0.8
0.1322
0.227
0.0086
OT-AD (Q99)
0.8
0.1322
0.227
0.0491
KNN-CAD
0.1359
0.7617
0.2307
17.0046
Numenta HTM
0.3385
0.2107
0.2598
82.1171*
CPU Utilization ASG Misconfiguration
OT-AD
0.9003
0.3856
0.5399
0.0294
OT-AD (Q99)
0.8889
0.3416
0.4935
0.077
KNN-CAD
0.0939
0.6691
0.1646
42.9797
Numenta HTM
0.7121
0.4736
0.5689
203.965*
EC2 Request Latency System Failure
OT-AD
1.0
0.3121
0.4758
0.0056
OT-AD (Q99)
1.0
0.3121
0.4758
0.0327
KNN-CAD
0.1453
0.7659
0.2442
8.178
Numenta HTM
0.7857
0.0954
0.1701
45.5616*
Machine Temperature System Failure
OT-AD
0.6385
0.3902
0.4844
0.0573
OT-AD (Q99)
0.2533
0.1019
0.1453
0.1796
KNN-CAD
0.1037
0.9383
0.1868
54.1042
Numenta HTM
0.2964
0.1204
0.1712
256.4535*
* Runtimes for Numenta HTM are extrapolated from iteration
latencies reported in the original paper.
nref = 128, ntest = 24, nbuf = 128 for all features. The short
test window ensures anomalies are detected quickly, while
the longer reference window and distance buffer account for
the high degree of variation in the system due to noise and
operational conditions.
Overall, OT-AD demonstrates a superior balance between
precision and recall, leading to a more stable F1 score com-
pared to KNN-CAD. While KNN-CAD excels in recall, cap-
turing more anomalies, it does so at the expense of precision,
resulting in a higher rate of false positives. Similarly, the Q99
variation of OT-AD sees slightly lower precision and much
lower recall than the original. The detections of the OT-AD and
KNN-CAD (with modified threshold) methods are shown in
Figure 3. Overall, OT-AD provides the most robust detection,
minimising false positives on this complex industrial data
compared to KNN-CAD which contains a signficant number
of false positives, frequently triggered by noise.
D. Explainable Anomaly Detection
Figure 4 illustrates the counterfactuals for anomalies de-
tected in the DT4GS case study. For the two flagged events,
the counterfactuals reflect how the observations would have
behaved according to the reference data. During the first
anomalous period, the temperature drops from approximately
34°C to 32.5°C, while the counterfactuals suggest the expected
range should be between 35.9°C and 37.8°C – in line with the
observed behaviour over the previous month. In the second
anomalous period, in May 2024, the observed temperature
spikes to 39°C, contrasting with the expected range of 32.4°C


Fig. 3: Anomalies detected by KNN-CAD and OT-AD over one year of industrial chiller data. Ground truth anomalies are
shown in grey. Note that the KNN-CAD threshold used for plotting is 0.95 (F1 score = 0.03) in order to visually match the
proportion of detections to OT-AD.
TABLE III: Performance, stratified by feature, of our method
and KNN-CAD [7] on industrial chiller system monitoring
data.
Method
Precision
Recall
F1 Score
Delta Temperature
OT-AD
0.3889
0.4574
0.4204
OT-AD (Q99)
0.3931
0.2911
0.3345
KNN-CAD
0.0886
0.7198
0.1578
Delta Setpoint
OT-AD
0.3187
0.4581
0.3759
OT-AD (Q99)
0.2337
0.4581
0.3095
KNN-CAD
0.1054
0.7713
0.1854
Cooling Load
OT-AD
0.4514
0.4523
0.4519
OT-AD (Q99)
0.6043
0.3817
0.4679
KNN-CAD
0.0869
0.6615
0.1537
to 34.9°C which follows the cyclic pattern established after
the previous anomalous period. These counterfactuals not only
highlight deviations from expected system behaviour but also
provide a clear picture of the system’s expected behaviour
during the flagged anomalies.
VI. DISCUSSION
The results presented on the three industrial datasets high-
light the strength of our OT-AD method, particularly on
complex systems subject to both operational and environmen-
tal fluctuations. The Poughkeepsie case study, in particular,
highlights the impact of pronounced seasonal variations on
system behaviour. The chiller is switched off during the winter
months when ambient temperatures provide sufficient natural
cooling, while in the summer, temperatures rise up to 30°C,
requiring the chiller to operate at full capacity. This seasonal
variation introduces challenges, as any successful anomaly
detection framework must distinguish between normal oper-
Fig. 4: A section of the DT4GS data in Figure 2. The
highlighted segment in red indicates an anomaly detected by
OT-AD, while the black line represents the counterfactual
explanation for the last point of each test window.
ational patterns and genuine anomalies. Our OT-AD method
is able to adapt to shifts within seasons, such as varying daily
or weekly cooling demands, as well as long-term wear and
degradation, thanks to the adaptive thresholding and sliding
reference periods. This approach also proved successful in
avoiding the detection of short-term fluctuations in the DT4GS
case study, such as those that occurred towards the end of
June, which other methods might falsely flag as anomalies.
This illustrates the method’s ability to focus on significant
deviations while ignoring noise and transient events, providing
more actionable insights.
Throughout the studies on labelled data, our OT-AD ap-
proach achieves high precision and good F1 scores compared
to two benchmark methods. This reduction in false positives


is crucial for deployment, where frequent alerts can reduce the
percieved severity of anomalies to the detriment of the health
of industrial equipment and the safety of operations. The OT-
AD method also consistently outperforms the quantile variant
OT-AD (Q99), showing that the t-statistic-driven threshold is
more performant.
The computational efficiency of the method is another key
advantage, highlighting the scalability and real-time applica-
bility of OT-AD for large-scale, continuous monitoring tasks.
This adaptability to streaming data makes the method highly
relevant for Edge AI applications, where computational re-
sources may be limited and quick decision-making is required.
In the context of the shipping industry, where real-time data
monitoring is crucial, the evolving trend towards a cloud-Edge
continuum enhances the relevance of this approach. These
paradigms typically involve a combination of data processing
onboard the ship or in the cloud depending on constraints
such as operational criticality, security, data volumes, and data
transmission costs [45]. Hence, low cost anomaly detection
methods are critical in many settings.
Another beneficial property of our proposed method is its
inherent interpretability, which is critical for industrial ap-
plications that prioritise auditability and transparency. Unlike
black-box models, which often offer limited interpretabil-
ity, our method empowers operators to confidently address
anomalies by providing counterfactual explanations – what
the system was expected to do based on reference mappings
– rather than relying on abstract metrics such as feature
importance. The structured nature of optimal transport ensures
that these counterfactual explanations are faithful and factual,
enabling operators to grasp the underlying causes of the
detected anomalies. This transparency is especially vital in
industries like manufacturing, shipping, and energy, where
safety, efficiency, and regulatory compliance are paramount
[46]. Similarly, this interpretability extends to the parameter
selection step. Since the three key hyperparameters of our
OT-AD method have physical meaning in the system to be
monitored, operators can utilise their understanding of system
operation – and the anomalies most important to be detected
– to set the parameters appropriately.
VII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we present an optimal transport-based method
for anomaly detection on unlabelled industrial asset data.
By constructing a sliding reference window and monitoring
system behaviour with respect to this, our highly-efficient
method provides explainable detections that are robust to
seasonal trends and concept drift. We evaluate the performance
of our approach on a popular anomaly detection benchmark as
well as against two industrial datasets from different industries
to showcase the consistent performance of the approach across
different applications.
Many industrial applications, such as HVAC systems, ex-
hibit pronounced seasonal dynamics. In this study, we used a
fixed-length sliding window for anomaly detection throughout
the entire period. However, adapting the window size to
account for known seasonal variations in data could further
enhance the method’s robustness and reduce false positives.
Real-time monitoring of false positives and false negatives
can help dynamically adjust anomaly score thresholds, ensur-
ing the system remains sensitive to true anomalies without
overreacting to noise. This approach can be seamlessly in-
tegrated into a rolling window framework, allowing periodic
adjustments based on recent performance data.
Agentic large language model (LLM) frameworks could fur-
ther enhance our anomaly detection method by automating the
integration of human feedback. These models can interpret op-
erator input, adjust detection thresholds, and refine parameters
in real time, creating a continuous feedback loop that improves
accuracy and responsiveness. Additionally, LLMs can help
generate auditable records of anomalies and corrective actions,
streamlining maintenance processes in industrial applications.
Further work is also planned to investigate the intelligent
combination of anomalies detected from different features or
KPIs in order to design robust system-level anomaly detection
based on known system architectures.
The proposed OT-based anomaly detection framework pro-
vides a robust, explainable, and computationally efficient
solution for real-time monitoring across diverse industrial
applications. Its ability to deliver explainable anomalies and
adapt to operational context makes it a valuable tool for
modern condition-based monitoring systems, offering asset-
specific insights and enhancing decision-making processes for
maintenance and operational management. This framework
holds significant promise for improving the reliability and ef-
ficiency of industrial systems while minimizing false positives
and ensuring transparency.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Research described in this paper has received funding from
the European Union’s Horizon Europe Research and Innova-
tion program under grant agreement no. 101056799.
REFERENCES
[1] E. Zio and M. Compare, “Evaluating maintenance policies by quanti-
tative modeling and analysis,” Reliability Engineering & System Safety,
vol. 109, pp. 53–65, 2013.
[2] N. Arunraj and J. Maiti, “Risk-based maintenance—techniques and
applications,” Journal of hazardous materials, vol. 142, no. 3, pp. 653–
661, 2007.
[3] N. Daoudi, Z. Smail, and M. Aboussaleh, “Machine learning based
predictive maintenance: Review, challenges and workflow,” in Interna-
tional Conference on Artificial Intelligence & Industrial Applications.
Springer, 2023, pp. 71–88.
[4] K. Shaukat, T. M. Alam, S. Luo, S. Shabbir, I. A. Hameed, J. Li,
S. K. Abbas, and U. Javed, “A review of time-series anomaly detection
techniques: A step to future perspectives,” in Advances in Information
and Communication: Proceedings of the 2021 Future of Information
and Communication Conference (FICC), Volume 1.
Springer, 2021,
pp. 865–877.
[5] Y. Meng, K.-C. Lu, Z. Dong, S. Li, and C. Shao, “Explainable few-shot
learning for online anomaly detection in ultrasonic metal welding with
varying configurations,” Journal of Manufacturing Processes, vol. 107,
pp. 345–355, 2023.
[6] R. Langone, A. Cuzzocrea, and N. Skantzos, “Interpretable anomaly
prediction: Predicting anomalous behavior in industry 4.0 settings via
regularized logistic regression tools,” Data & Knowledge Engineering,
vol. 130, p. 101850, 2020.


[7] E. Burnaev and V. Ishimtsev, “Conformalized density-and distance-based
anomaly detection in time-series data,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1608.04585,
2016.
[8] G. Pang, C. Shen, L. Cao, and A. V. D. Hengel, “Deep learning for
anomaly detection: A review,” ACM computing surveys (CSUR), vol. 54,
no. 2, pp. 1–38, 2021.
[9] B. Rad, F. Song, V. Jacob, and Y. Diao, “Explainable anomaly detection
on high-dimensional time series data,” in Proceedings of the 15th ACM
International Conference on Distributed and Event-based Systems, 2021,
pp. 2–14.
[10] S. Ahmad, A. Lavin, S. Purdy, and Z. Agha, “Unsupervised real-time
anomaly detection for streaming data,” Neurocomputing, vol. 262, pp.
134–147, 2017.
[11] A. Q. Khan, S. El Jaouhari, N. Tamani, and L. Mroueh, “Knowledge-
based anomaly detection: Survey, challenges, and future directions,”
Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence, vol. 136, p. 108996,
2024.
[12] S. Ramaswamy, R. Rastogi, and K. Shim, “Efficient algorithms for
mining outliers from large data sets,” in Proceedings of the 2000 ACM
SIGMOD international conference on Management of data, 2000, pp.
427–438.
[13] M. M. Breunig, H.-P. Kriegel, R. T. Ng, and J. Sander, “Lof: identifying
density-based local outliers,” in Proceedings of the 2000 ACM SIGMOD
international conference on Management of data, 2000, pp. 93–104.
[14] A. Von Birgelen, D. Buratti, J. Mager, and O. Niggemann, “Self-
organizing maps for anomaly localization and predictive maintenance
in cyber-physical production systems,” Procedia cirp, vol. 72, pp. 480–
485, 2018.
[15] V. Balasubramanian, S.-S. Ho, and V. Vovk, Conformal prediction
for reliable machine learning: theory, adaptations and applications.
Newnes, 2014.
[16] Z. Li, Y. Zhu, and M. Van Leeuwen, “A survey on explainable anomaly
detection,” ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data,
vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 1–54, 2023.
[17] I. Lage, E. Chen, J. He, M. Narayanan, B. Kim, S. Gershman, and
F. Doshi-Velez, “An evaluation of the human-interpretability of expla-
nation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.00006, 2019.
[18] R. Guidotti, A. Monreale, S. Ruggieri, F. Turini, F. Giannotti, and
D. Pedreschi, “A survey of methods for explaining black box models,”
ACM computing surveys (CSUR), vol. 51, no. 5, pp. 1–42, 2018.
[19] M. T. Ribeiro, S. Singh, and C. Guestrin, “” why should i trust you?”
explaining the predictions of any classifier,” in Proceedings of the 22nd
ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery and
data mining, 2016, pp. 1135–1144.
[20] A. Datta, S. Sen, and Y. Zick, “Algorithmic transparency via quantitative
input influence: Theory and experiments with learning systems,” in 2016
IEEE symposium on security and privacy (SP).
IEEE, 2016, pp. 598–
617.
[21] K. Amarasinghe, K. Kenney, and M. Manic, “Toward explainable deep
neural network based anomaly detection,” in 2018 11th international
conference on human system interaction (HSI).
IEEE, 2018, pp. 311–
317.
[22] G. Peyr´e, M. Cuturi et al., Computational optimal transport: With
applications to data science.
Now Publishers, Inc., 2019, vol. 11,
no. 5-6.
[23] L. V. Kantorovich, “On the translocation of masses,” in Dokl. Akad.
Nauk. USSR (NS), vol. 37, 1942, pp. 199–201.
[24] P. Seshadri, A. B. Duncan, G. Thorne, and R. V. Diaz, “Spatial anomaly
detection with optimal transport,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.06166,
2022.
[25] N. Craig, J. N. Howard, and H. Li, “Exploring optimal transport
for event-level anomaly detection at the large hadron collider,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2401.15542, 2024.
[26] T. T. Y. Nguyen, W. Harchaoui, L. M´egret, C. Mendoza, O. Bouaziz,
C. Neri, and A. Chambaz, “Optimal transport-based machine learning
to match specific patterns: application to the detection of molecular
regulation patterns in omics data,” Journal of the Royal Statistical
Society Series C: Applied Statistics, vol. 73, no. 3, pp. 639–657, 2024.
[27] N. Huyan, X. Zhang, D. Quan, J. Chanussot, and L. Jiao, “Cluster-
memory augmented deep autoencoder via optimal transportation for
hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and
Remote Sensing, vol. 60, pp. 1–16, 2022.
[28] A. Alaoui-Belghiti, S. Chevallier, E. Monacelli, G. Bao, and E. Azabou,
“Semi-supervised optimal transport methods for detecting anomalies,” in
ICASSP 2020-2020 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech
and Signal Processing (ICASSP).
IEEE, 2020, pp. 2997–3001.
[29] Y. Rubner, C. Tomasi, and L. J. Guibas, “The earth mover’s distance as
a metric for image retrieval,” International journal of computer vision,
vol. 40, pp. 99–121, 2000.
[30] J. M. Altschuler and E. Boix-Adsera, “Wasserstein barycenters are np-
hard to compute,” SIAM Journal on Mathematics of Data Science, vol. 4,
no. 1, pp. 179–203, 2022.
[31] W. Yu, Z. Sun, J. Xu, Z. Dong, X. Chen, H. Xu, and J.-R. Wen,
“Explainable legal case matching via inverse optimal transport-based
rationale extraction,” in Proceedings of the 45th international ACM
SIGIR conference on research and development in information retrieval,
2022, pp. 657–668.
[32] Z. Sun, W. Yu, Z. Si, J. Xu, Z. Dong, X. Chen, H. Xu, and J.-R. Wen,
“Explainable legal case matching via graph optimal transport,” IEEE
Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 2023.
[33] A. Miroshnikov, K. Kotsiopoulos, R. Franks, and A. Ravi Kannan,
“Wasserstein-based fairness interpretability framework for machine
learning models,” Machine Learning, vol. 111, no. 9, pp. 3307–3357,
2022.
[34] S. S. Chaudhury, P. Sadhukhan, and K. Sengupta, “Explainable ai using
the wasserstein distance,” IEEE Access, 2024.
[35] L. You, L. Cao, and M. Nilsson, “Discount: Distributional counterfactual
explanation with optimal transport,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.13112,
2024.
[36] A. Langbridge, A. Quinn, and R. Shorten, “Overcoming representation
bias in fairness-aware data repair using optimal transport,” Communica-
tions in Optimization Theory, 2024.
[37] “Review of maritime transport 2023,” United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, New York, Annual Report, 2023, available
online: https://unctad.org/publication/review-maritime-transport-2023.
[38] A. S. Mavrakos, T. Tsaousis, N. Faggioni, A. Caviglia, and E. Manzo, “A
digital twin approach for selection and deployment of decarbonization
solutions for the maritime sector,” in State-of-the-Art Digital Twin
Applications for Shipping Sector Decarbonization.
IGI Global, 2024,
pp. 26–52.
[39] D. L´opez, I. Aguilera-Martos, M. Garc´ıa-Barzana, F. Herrera, D. Garc´ıa-
Gil, and J. Luengo, “Fusing anomaly detection with false positive
mitigation methodology for predictive maintenance under multivariate
time series,” Information Fusion, vol. 100, p. 101957, 2023.
[40] J. Granderson, G. Lin, Y. Chen, A. Casillas, J. Wen, Z. Chen, P. Im,
S. Huang, and J. Ling, “A labeled dataset for building hvac systems
operating in faulted and fault-free states,” Scientific data, vol. 10, no. 1,
p. 342, 2023.
[41] K. B. Misra, Handbook of advanced performability engineering.
Springer, 2021.
[42] R. Flamary, N. Courty, A. Gramfort, M. Z. Alaya, A. Boisbunon,
S. Chambon, L. Chapel, A. Corenflos, K. Fatras, N. Fournier et al.,
“Pot: Python optimal transport,” Journal of Machine Learning Research,
vol. 22, no. 78, pp. 1–8, 2021.
[43] K. Goode and H. Hofmann, “Visual diagnostics of an explainer model:
Tools for the assessment of lime explanations,” Statistical Analysis and
Data Mining: The ASA Data Science Journal, vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 185–
200, 2021.
[44] P.
Nunes,
J.
Santos,
and
E.
Rocha,
“Challenges
in
predictive
maintenance–a review,” CIRP Journal of Manufacturing Science and
Technology, vol. 40, pp. 53–67, 2023.
[45] F. O’Donncha, J. D. Sheehan, M. Touma, S. Zemouri, and R. H.
High, “Towards intelligent ship-edge computing enabling automated
configuration of ship models and adaptive self-learning,” in State-of-
the-Art Digital Twin Applications for Shipping Sector Decarbonization.
IGI Global, 2024, pp. 73–93.
[46] I. Ahmed, G. Jeon, and F. Piccialli, “From artificial intelligence to
explainable artificial intelligence in industry 4.0: a survey on what, how,
and where,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 18, no. 8,
pp. 5031–5042, 2022.
