Title: D2H-AD: A Hybrid Model Utilizing Hyperdimensional Computing for Advanced Anomaly Detection

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.13754v1

Published Time: Mon, 15 Jun 2026 00:04:19 GMT

Number of Pages: 21

Markdown Content:
> Date of publication xxxx 00, 0000, date of current version xxxx 00, 0000.
> Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/ACCESS.2025.0429000

# D2H-AD: A Hybrid Model Utilizing Hyperdimensional Computing for Advanced Anomaly Detection 

GHAZAL GHAJARI 1 , ELAHEH GHAJARI 2 , ASHUTOSH GHIMIRE 1 , SAEID ATAEI 3 ,FARIS ALSULAMI 4 , FATHI AMSAAD 1    

> 1Wright State University, Dayton, Ohio 45435, USA (e-mail: [ghajari.2, ashutosh.ghimire, fathi.amsaad]@wright.edu)
> 2Azad University, Ahvaz 6887561349, Iran (e-mail: elaheh.ghajari.1@gmail.com)
> 3Stevens Institute of Technology, Hoboken, New Jersey 07030, USA (e-mail: sataei@stevens.edu)
> 4University of Jeddah, Jeddah 23890, Saudi Arabia (e-mail: fnalsulami@uj.edu.sa)

ABSTRACT Anomaly detection is a cornerstone of modern intelligent systems, with critical applications in healthcare, cybersecurity, smart grids, and IoT environments. While traditional machine learning and deep learning models have shown promise in identifying outliers, they often face challenges such as dependence on large labeled datasets, high computational costs, and limited scalability to edge devices or high-dimensional data streams. This study introduces D2H-AD, a novel anomaly detection framework built upon Hyperdimensional Computing (HDC), a brain-inspired paradigm that encodes information using high-dimensional distributed vectors. Unlike prior HDC-based approaches, D2H-AD fuses distance-based similarity and density-aware encoding in a hybrid design, significantly improving anomaly characterization and detection accuracy. Ablation experiments confirm that hyperdimensional encoding alone contributes up to 5.4% higher ROC-AUC compared to applying the same density-distance scoring in the original Euclidean feature space, and D2H-AD consistently outperforms all five published baselines (HDAD, ODHD, One-Class SVM, Isolation Forest, and Autoencoders) across every evaluated dataset. The method is designed to be lightweight, interpretable, and computationally efficient, suggesting strong suitability for deployment in resource-constrained and real-time environments. To validate its effectiveness, we evaluate D2H-AD on five diverse benchmark datasets, comparing its performance against five leading techniques: HDAD, ODHD, One-Class SVM, Isolation Forest, and Autoencoders. Our results show that D2H-AD consistently achieves superior F1 scores and ROC-AUC metrics, demonstrating robustness against class imbalance, noise, and data complexity. Beyond accuracy, D2H-AD offers practical advantages including scalability, minimal memory footprint, and an expected low-latency profile derived from its binary operations and lightweight design. These characteristics are crucial for TinyML and edge AI applications. This work highlights the untapped potential of HDC for high-performance anomaly detection and opens new avenues for secure, interpretable, and energy-efficient AI solutions in dynamic environments such as IoT, embedded systems, and beyond. Additionally, D2H-AD provides feature-level interpretability through hypervector decoding, enabling transparent explanations for safety-critical applications. 

INDEX TERMS Hyperdimensional Computing, Anomaly Detection, Density-Based Scoring, One-Class Classification, IoT Security 

I. INTRODUCTION 

# ANOMALY detection, also known as outlier detection, is a critical process in data analysis and machine learning that involves identifying unusual patterns or behaviors in data streams that deviate significantly from what is expected. These anomalies or outliers are often sudden, infrequent phe-nomena that were not previously encountered, making them difficult to predict and manage [1]. While some anomalies may be benign, others can be hazardous, potentially indicat-ing system faults, security breaches, or other critical issues. The identification of these abnormal patterns is essential as it can provide valuable insights and enable timely interventions in various fields [2]. Anomaly detection plays a critical role across diverse   

> VOLUME 11, 2023 1
> arXiv:2606.13754v1 [cs.LG] 11 Jun 2026 Author et al. : Preparation of Papers for IEEE ACCESS

sectors, including healthcare, cybersecurity, fraud detection, IoT, industrial systems, and critical infrastructure. In clinical and biomedical contexts, class imbalance-aware federated imaging [3], secure cardiac monitoring [4], gait abnormality detection in Parkinson’s patients [5], hospital network EHR analysis [6], and wireless body area network security [7] high-light the demand for interpretable and privacy-preserving so-lutions. In industrial and computing domains, AI-based fault detection for power systems [8], real-time anomaly detection [9], TinyML-driven IoT monitoring [10], and evolutionary approaches to industrial anomaly detection [11] underscore the importance of scalable and resource-efficient methods for distributed edge environments. With the rise of data mining, the demand for robust anomaly detection mechanisms has intensified. Traditional tools like intrusion detection systems (IDS), malware scan-ners, and network monitoring software typically employ rule-based detection methods, comparing incoming data traffic against predefined patterns or rules to identify potential threats [12]. While effective for known issues, these methods can become outdated and less effective as data patterns evolve and become increasingly complex, necessitating the explo-ration of more adaptive and intelligent detection strategies. These challenges are amplified in resource-constrained devices where memory and latency are critical. To address these challenges, modern approaches in anomaly detection in-creasingly rely on data mining techniques. These techniques involve analyzing large datasets to uncover patterns and asso-ciations that may indicate anomalies. Some common methods include clustering, where data is grouped, and classification, where data is divided into categories based on pre-labeled training data. While cluster-based anomaly detection is useful for identifying unfamiliar attacks by segmenting data into smaller subsets, classification methods are often more precise but may struggle with high-volume data due to scalability issues [13]. The field of anomaly detection has evolved considerably with the integration of advanced data mining techniques, such as temporal mining, outlier detection, and association rule mining. These methodologies work in synergy to improve the precision and speed of detecting anomalies, particularly in dynamic and high-volume environments. For example, in cybersecurity, real-time network anomaly detection systems are critical for analyzing traffic patterns and identifying sus-picious activities like unauthorized access or data breaches [14]. In healthcare, advanced anomaly detection techniques are utilized to analyze medical imaging data, such as detecting subtle abnormalities in MRI or CT scans that may indicate early-stage diseases [15]. Additionally, video anomaly de-tection systems are increasingly deployed in security and surveillance, where they are used to identify unusual behav-iors in real-time across public transportation hubs, airports, and other sensitive locations [16]–[18]. Despite the progress in anomaly detection, several chal-lenges remain. The development of versatile algorithms that can adapt to different scenarios and handle large volumes of data in real time is a significant hurdle. Traditional rule-based algorithms often lack the flexibility to adapt to new or changing data patterns, rendering them ineffective in dynamic environments. In contrast, nonparametric learning algorithms offer more adaptability, allowing them to respond to evolving data by learning from previous instances. Supervised classification learning, a popular approach in machine learning, has gained considerable attention for its ef-fectiveness in anomaly detection. Algorithms such as decision trees, fuzzy logic systems, and support vector machines have been widely used, with artificial neural networks showing particular promise due to their ability to model complex relationships in data [19]. However, challenges such as poor generalization, local convergence issues, and structural diffi-culties in neural networks still need to be addressed. To overcome these limitations, hybrid approaches that combine supervised and unsupervised techniques are being explored [20]. These methods aim to reduce false alarm rates and improve detection accuracy, though they come with their own set of challenges, including complexity in algorithm design, the need for diverse training samples, and difficulties in ensuring scalability. As research in this area continues to evolve, there is significant potential for further advancements in anomaly detection, particularly in improving the scala-bility, real-time processing, and interpretability of detection models. These developments are crucial for enhancing the effectiveness of anomaly detection across various applica-tions and ensuring the reliability of systems in increasingly complex and data-rich environments. These methods can be resource-intensive, requiring substantial computational power and large amounts of labeled data. Furthermore, they often struggle in environments characterized by high dimen-sionality, noise, and the need for real-time analysis. This is where Hyperdimensional Computing (HDC) comes into play. HDC, also known as vector symbolic architec-ture, is a novel computational paradigm inspired by the way the human brain processes information. Unlike conventional computing methods that rely on precise numerical represen-tations, HDC represents data using high-dimensional binary vectors, also known as hypervectors. These hypervectors can encode complex patterns in a way that is both robust to noise and computationally efficient [21], [22]. One of the key advantages of HDC is its ability to perform operations on these vectors that mimic cognitive processes, such as associative memory and reasoning, enabling rapid learning and inference. The importance of HDC in the context of anomaly de-tection cannot be overstated. Traditional anomaly detection methods often require extensive training and are sensitive to noise and variability in the data. In contrast, HDC’s use of high-dimensional spaces allows for the natural separation of normal and anomalous patterns, even in the presence of noise. This makes HDC particularly well-suited for resource-constrained environments, such as IoT devices and embedded systems, where computational efficiency and robustness are paramount [23]. Additionally, HDC’s ability to generalize   

> 2VOLUME 11, 2023 Author et al. : Preparation of Papers for IEEE TRANSACTIONS and JOURNALS

from limited data makes it an attractive option in scenarios where labeled anomalies are scarce. Applications of anomaly detection using HDC span mul-tiple domains. In cybersecurity, HDC can be employed to detect unusual patterns in network traffic, potentially iden-tifying security breaches in real-time [23]–[25]. In industrial settings, HDC can monitor sensor data from machinery, iden-tifying early signs of equipment failure and thus preventing costly downtime [26], [27]. In healthcare, HDC can assist in monitoring patient data for signs of irregularities that may indicate the onset of a medical condition [28], [29]. Despite these advantages, the application of HDC in anomaly de-tection is not without limitations. One challenge is the need to carefully design the encoding of data into hypervectors, as poor encoding can lead to suboptimal performance. Ad-ditionally, while HDC is inherently robust to noise, it may still struggle with very subtle anomalies that are close to the normal data distribution [30]. The relationship between anomaly detection and HDC is symbiotic, with each enhancing the capabilities of the other. Anomaly detection benefits from HDC’s ability to efficiently handle high-dimensional data and its robustness to noise, while HDC provides a framework within which complex data patterns can be effectively modeled and analyzed. Recent work has demonstrated HDC’s symbolic and interpretable properties in cybersecurity reasoning [31], highlighting the broader applicability of brain-inspired computing paradigms. Our work introduces D2H-AD, which integrates distance-based similarity and density-aware scoring within the HDC encoding framework. By combining these complementary metrics, the proposed method aims to better characterize anomalous patterns in imbalanced and high-dimensional datasets. Empirical evaluation on benchmark datasets demon-strates the effectiveness of this hybrid approach across diverse anomaly detection scenarios. The following research contributions are reported in this paper. 1) We introduce D2H-AD, an unsupervised anomaly de-tection method named after its core components: Den-sity, Distance metrics, and Hyperdimensional Comput-ing, combined for Anomaly Detection. This approach demonstrates competitiveness with supervised methods, all while eliminating the need for extensive training time. The elimination of lengthy training is achieved through Hyperdimensional Computing’s (HDC) ability to represent data as high-dimensional binary vectors, allowing for direct computation of density and distance metrics without the iterative optimization processes typ-ically required by traditional machine learning models. By leveraging these pre-encoded hypervectors, D2H-AD efficiently computes anomaly scores without relying on large-scale labeled datasets or time-intensive model training. 2) We propose a novel anomaly detection method that com-bines density and distance metrics within a Hyperdimen-sional Computing (HDC) framework. The innovation lies in encoding the dataset into high-dimensional binary vectors, which inherently capture data relationships and patterns. The anomaly detection process is then driven by a two-step approach: first, the encoded hypervectors enable efficient computation of density and distance metrics without the traditional computational overhead; second, an anomaly score is calculated based on these metrics, leveraging the high-dimensional space to nat-urally separate normal and anomalous patterns. This streamlined yet effective process enhances detection ac-curacy while suggesting computational efficiency, even in high-dimensional and noisy datasets. 3) We evaluated the performance of the proposed D2H-AD model across five diverse datasets [32] and compared it with several well-established and recent methods. The results, assessed using F1 score and ROC-AUC metrics, consistently showed that our model outperformed the baseline techniques in all cases. This demonstrates the effectiveness and robustness of our approach in handling various anomaly detection tasks, offering a significant improvement over existing methods. [33]–[47] We structure the subsequent sections of this paper as fol-lows: Section 2 offers a detailed review of related work on Hyperdimensional Computing in anomaly detection. Section 3 details the proposed methodology. In Section 4, we present the results of our empirical evaluation, demonstrating the validity and effectiveness of our approach. Finally, Section 5 offers concluding remarks. 

> II. RELATED WORK

Anomaly detection is a cornerstone in modern artificial intel-ligence and data mining, playing a pivotal role in diverse do-mains such as cybersecurity, healthcare diagnostics, finance, industrial monitoring, and smart grid systems. The primary objective is to identify unusual patterns or behaviors that differ significantly from the norm, which often correspond to critical faults, fraudulent activities, or emergent system threats. Depending on the availability of labeled data and the complexity of the underlying problem, anomaly detec-tion techniques are broadly classified into supervised, semi-supervised, and unsupervised categories. Supervised approaches rely on a dataset that includes la-beled examples of both normal and anomalous behavior. These models, especially deep learning architectures like Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), have been exten-sively applied in tasks such as network intrusion detection, medical image analysis, and fraud detection [33]. They can achieve high performance when trained on large, high-quality datasets. Nevertheless, acquiring such labeled datasets is non-trivial, particularly in domains where anomalies are rare or costly to label. Additionally, supervised models may exhibit poor generalization to previously unseen anomaly types, a limitation often referred to as the open-set recognition prob-lem. Semi-supervised anomaly detection methods typically as-sume that the available data is predominantly normal, with    

> VOLUME 11, 2023 3Author et al. : Preparation of Papers for IEEE ACCESS
> TABLE 1. Comparison of Existing Anomaly Detection Methods

Method Strengths Limitations 

Supervised Deep Learning (e.g., CNN) [33] High accuracy on labeled data; learns complex pat-terns Requires large labeled datasets; poor generalization to un-seen anomalies; high training cost Semi-supervised (e.g., GAN) [34] Leverages small labeled set; models non-linear boundaries well Sensitive to label quality; unstable adversarial training; high resource usage Unsupervised (e.g., OCSVM, Isola-tion Forest, Autoencoder) [35]–[37] No label requirement; suitable for real-world scenar-ios Limited performance on complex/high-dimensional data; may overlook subtle anomalies Statistical Methods (e.g., GMM) [38] Interpretable; efficient on structured, low-dimensional data Assumes specific distribution; not robust for heteroge-neous or real-time streams HDC-based Methods (e.g., HDAD, ODHD, IFODHD, PoisonHD) [39]–[41], [44]–[46], [48] Fast, lightweight, interpretable; robust to noise and imbalance; explainable; efficient on small data; hard-ware/edge friendly Encoding strategies require task-specific design choices (e.g., quantization levels, projection dimensions, feature selection thresholds vary across domains); limited public benchmarks; evolving defense mechanisms Proposed Approach (D2H-AD) Combines dual-domain HDC encoding with opti-mized feature selection and PoisonHD-style defense; explainable and scalable for edge/IoT Under evaluation; needs further benchmarking and gener-alization across diverse datasets  

> TABLE 2. Practical comparison of anomaly detection approaches across deployment-related aspects.

Method Label Requirement Handles HD Data Computational Complexity Edge/IoT Friendly 

Supervised DL (e.g., CNN) High Yes High No Semi-supervised (e.g., GAN) Medium Yes High No OCSVM / Isolation Forest None Partially Low–Medium Moderate Autoencoder None Yes Medium–High Moderate Statistical (e.g., GMM) None No Low Yes HDC-based (HDAD, ODHD, IFODHD) None Yes Low Yes HDC + Defense (e.g., PoisonHD) None Yes Low–Medium Yes resilient with memory sanitization 

Proposed (D2H-AD) None Yes Very Low Suitable (expected real-time) Notes. Label Requirement: None = method runs unsupervised without labeled anomalies. Handles HD Data: Yes = binary hypervectors preserve robustness in high dimensions. Computational Complexity ratings are based on algorithmic operation counts (XOR, addition) and memory requirements (linear in m, n, D). 

Edge/IoT Friendly and Real-time suitability refer to algorithmic properties (binary operations, linear memory) that suggest hardware efficiency; actual hardware implementation and benchmarking are not included in this work. 

very limited labeled anomalies. These models learn to char-acterize the normal data distribution and identify deviations as potential outliers. Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) have gained popularity in this space for their ability to gen-erate synthetic samples and refine decision boundaries [34]. While GAN-based approaches offer flexibility and often out-perform traditional methods, they are prone to training insta-bility and can be sensitive to class imbalance or noisy labels. Unsupervised methods are the most flexible in real-world settings, as they do not require labeled data. Techniques like One-Class Support Vector Machines (OCSVM), Isola-tion Forests, and Autoencoders have become widely adopted [35]–[37]. OCSVM creates a decision boundary around nor-mal data, Isolation Forests randomly partition data and iden-tify anomalies as those requiring fewer splits, and Autoen-coders reconstruct input data to measure reconstruction er-rors as indicators of anomalous behavior. While these ap-proaches are scalable and generally effective, they often struggle with high-dimensional data, temporal dependencies, and subtle anomalies embedded within complex patterns. These limitations have also been documented in hardware security contexts, where OC-SVM and reconstruction-based Autoencoders proved fragile under process variation and ad-versarial perturbations [49]. Recent advances in neuromor-phic computing have also explored evolving spiking neural networks for unsupervised anomaly detection in streaming data, demonstrating competitive performance with reduced computational overhead [50], [51]. While deep Autoencoders are widely used for anomaly de-tection due to their ability to capture nonlinear structures, they typically require large parameterized networks, iterative gra-dient descent, and significant memory resources [52]. In con-trast, HDC-based methods operate with lightweight binary operations, achieving comparable accuracy with far lower computational overhead [53]. Moreover, unlike Autoen-coders that behave as opaque models, HDC offers feature-level interpretability through prototype hypervectors, making it more suitable for safety-critical and resource-constrained applications. Autoencoders detect anomalies through reconstruction er-  

> 4VOLUME 11, 2023 Author et al. : Preparation of Papers for IEEE TRANSACTIONS and JOURNALS

ror [54], which can fail when anomalies lie on or near the learned data manifold, whereas HDC methods like D2H-AD explicitly model local density and relative distances in high-dimensional space, enabling detection of subtle anomalies that exhibit normal reconstruction patterns but deviate in their neighborhood structure. The single-pass encoding of HDC eliminates the need for iterative training epochs, while the distributed representation across high-dimensional binary vectors provides inherent robustness to noise and missing fea-tures that would require explicit regularization in autoencoder architectures. These theoretical advantages are reflected in our comparative analysis (Tables 1 and 2), where HDC-based methods demonstrate superior edge-deployment suitability and lower computational complexity than autoencoders. In addition to learning-based techniques, statistical models such as the Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) with Expecta-tion Maximization have also been explored for anomaly de-tection tasks [38]. While GMMs are mathematically elegant and computationally efficient, their reliance on parametric assumptions, such as the data following a Gaussian distribu-tion, limits their effectiveness in complex, high-variance, or multimodal datasets. Recent advancements have seen the emergence of Hy-perdimensional Computing (HDC), inspired by principles of brain functionality and cognitive computing. HDC operates on high-dimensional vectors known as hypervectors, which represent data in a distributed and noise-resilient manner [39]. Unlike conventional numerical computation, HDC en-ables fast, parallelizable, and interpretable operations like binding, bundling, and permutation. Due to its low compu-tational complexity, inherent robustness, and ability to gen-eralize from few examples, HDC has become an attractive framework for anomaly detection, particularly in resource-constrained environments like embedded systems and edge devices. 

> A. HYPERDIMENSIONAL COMPUTING FUNDAMENTALS
> 1) Core Principles and Vector Generation

Hyperdimensional Computing (HDC) represents information using high-dimensional binary or bipolar vectors (hypervec-tors) of dimension D, typically D ≥ 10 ,000 . The computa-tional model relies on three fundamental operations that pre-serve semantic relationships in the hyperdimensional space:  

> •

Binding ( ⊗): Combines two hypervectors to create a dissimilar composite. For binary vectors, binding is im-plemented via element-wise XOR: h = hi ⊗ hj where 

h[k] = hi[k] ⊕ hj[k]. For bipolar vectors {− 1, +1 },element-wise multiplication is used. Binding is approx-imately invertible: hi ⊗ (hi ⊗ hj) ≈ hj. 

> •

Bundling ( +): Aggregates multiple hypervectors into a composite representation that is similar to all con-stituents. For binary vectors: H = MAJ (h1 +h2 +. . . +

hn) where MAJ binarizes by majority vote. For bipolar vectors, element-wise addition followed by sign function is used.  

> •

Permutation ( ρ): Rearranges vector elements to encode sequential or positional information, typically via circu-lar shift: ρ(h) = [ h[D], h[1] , h[2] , . . . , h[D − 1]] .

> 2) Encoding Strategies

HDC encoding transforms raw features into hypervectors while preserving semantic relationships. Common strategies include:  

> •

Level Hypervectors: Continuous values are quantized into K levels, each assigned a hypervector. Adjacent levels have similar hypervectors (Hamming distance ≈

D/K ), creating a smooth similarity gradient [21].  

> •

Random Projection: Dense vectors are projected into high-dimensional space using random matrices, leverag-ing the Johnson-Lindenstrauss lemma for dimensional-ity expansion while preserving distances.  

> •

Sparse Distributed Representation: Inspired by fruit fly olfactory circuits, sparse hypervectors ( ≈ 1–5% 

active bits) can enhance separability and reduce compu-tational cost in specific applications.  

> •

N-gram Encoding: For sequential data, overlapping n-grams are encoded by binding character/token hypervec-tors with position-dependent permutations. 

> 3) Orthogonality and Randomness

The effectiveness of HDC critically depends on the quasi-orthogonality of randomly generated base hypervectors. For 

D = 10 ,000 and Bernoulli (0 .5) generation, the Ham-ming distance between independent hypervectors concen-trates around D/2 ± √D with exponentially high probability. This statistical orthogonality ensures that binding operations produce dissimilar outputs and bundling preserves distin-guishability. Recent work has explored:  

> •

Deterministic orthogonal codes (e.g., Hadamard matri-ces, Discrete Fourier Transform bases)  

> •

Hardware-efficient generation using Linear Feedback Shift Registers (LFSRs)  

> •

Biologically-plausible sparse random projections  

> •

Structured random matrices for reduced generation com-plexity 

> 4) Platform Efficiency and Hardware Implementations

HDC’s appeal for edge computing stems from its intrinsic hardware efficiency:  

> •

Bit-serial Processing: Binary operations (XOR, pop-count) map directly to digital logic without floating-point units  

> •

In-Memory Computing: Associative memory archi-tectures (e.g., resistive RAM, memristors) can perform HDC operations with reduced data movement  

> •

FPGA Implementations: Parallel bit-wise operations achieve sub-microsecond inference latency  

> •

Neuromorphic Hardware: Spiking implementations on Intel Loihi and IBM TrueNorth demonstrate energy efficiency gains of 10 –100 × over GPU baselines [55]   

> VOLUME 11, 2023 5Author et al. : Preparation of Papers for IEEE ACCESS

Recent benchmarking studies show HDC achieving 1000 ×

speedup and 100 × energy reduction compared to deep neural networks on embedded platforms, with accuracy within 1–3% 

on classification tasks. 

> 5) Recent Surveys and Theoretical Advances

Recent comprehensive surveys have characterized HDC’s theoretical foundations and practical deployment [53], [56], [57]:  

> •

Capacity analysis showing that D-dimensional binary hypervectors can reliably store O(D2/ log D) patterns  

> •

Robustness guarantees demonstrating graceful degrada-tion under up to D/4 bit errors  

> •

Convergence proofs for iterative HDC learning showing 

O(log n) training iterations for n-class problems  

> •

Cross-domain benchmarking across language, vision, sensor fusion, robotics, and bioinformatics applications 

> B. HDC-BASED ANOMALY DETECTION METHODS

Having established the theoretical foundations of Hyperdi-mensional Computing, we now examine how these principles have been applied to anomaly detection across diverse appli-cation domains. The HDAD and ODHD frameworks demonstrate how HDC can be applied to anomaly detection tasks with minimal reliance on labeled data [40], [41]. ODHD, a one-class model, removes the need for decoder architectures and leverages HDC’s strength in handling high-dimensional spaces effi-ciently. In practice, ODHD outperforms traditional models on classification accuracy and runtime while maintaining low memory and energy consumption. Recent research has explored the use of Hyperdimensional Computing for network-based anomaly detection, particu-larly in IoT environments. For instance, in [42], HDC was applied to the NSL-KDD dataset for intrusion detection, demonstrating superior performance with an accuracy of 91.55%. Similarly, [43] presented an HDC-based framework that accurately classified various attack types in IoT networks, achieving 99.54% accuracy. These studies highlight the effi-ciency and robustness of HDC in handling high-dimensional cybersecurity tasks, and motivate the extension of HDC-based methods beyond network intrusion to broader anomaly detection contexts, as pursued in our proposed D2H-AD. To address the issue of data imbalance at the IoT edge, [48] proposed a hybrid approach combining HDC with Enhanced Geometric SMOTE (EG-SMOTE). This method achieved improved accuracy in threat detection and significantly out-performed conventional oversampling and classification tech-niques on benchmark cybersecurity datasets, demonstrating the synergy of HDC with data-level balancing techniques. Further improvements have been realized through the inte-gration of feature selection. IFODHD [44] combines the Min-imum Redundancy Maximum Relevance (mRMR) feature selection method with HDC’s encoding process. This reduces feature dimensionality and redundancy, improving model per-formance across diverse datasets. The approach not only en-hances classification metrics (accuracy, F1 score, ROC-AUC) but also significantly decreases model latency and memory footprint, making it ideal for applications in wearable devices, autonomous systems, and mobile platforms. In the healthcare domain, [45] applied HDC to classify abnormal cardiac rhythms in arrhythmia datasets. By incorpo-rating an AUC-based feature selection process into the HDC pipeline, the proposed system outperformed classical models like SVM and MLP, confirming HDC’s potential in multi-class and imbalanced clinical data scenarios. In parallel, HDC proved effective in real-time industrial applications. In [47], HDC was applied to electrical load anomaly detection in smart grids. The model operated directly on raw meter data without preprocessing, offering superior performance over traditional ML/DL approaches in terms of speed, scalability, and detection accuracy, particularly in imbalanced data environments. Its successful deployment on a mid-range laptop underscored its efficiency and readiness for integration into edge computing systems such as smart meters, energy-efficient controllers, and IoT gateways. Moreover, HDC models are uniquely positioned for ex-plainable AI (XAI). Their algebraic nature allows intuitive tracing of decisions through hypervector operations. This property is particularly useful in critical systems such as healthcare or autonomous vehicles, where interpretability and trust are paramount. Recent studies have proposed integrating causal analysis with HDC, enhancing the transparency of detected anomalies and offering insights into their underlying causes. Security concerns have also emerged with the adoption of HDC in sensitive systems. PoisonHD [46] presents the first targeted attack model for HDC systems, using a label-flipping strategy guided by confidence ranking. The study reveals that despite HDC’s robustness, it can still be vulnerable to poison-ing attacks. To mitigate this, PoisonHD introduces an HDC-specific defense mechanism based on data sanitization using verified memory modules. This sanitization filters poisoned samples before training and has been shown to restore per-formance to near-baseline levels. The findings emphasize the growing importance of adversarial resilience in lightweight, deployable AI. While HDC-based methods offer computational efficiency, their encoding strategies often require task-specific design choices. For instance, HDAD [40] relies on explicit selec-tion of quantization levels and base hypervector initialization schemes that differ between continuous sensor data (e.g., automotive CAN bus signals) and discrete categorical fea-tures. Similarly, ODHD [41] requires dataset-dependent tun-ing of the projection dimension and the number of training epochs for prototype learning, which varies substantially be-tween image-based tasks (e.g., MNIST) and tabular datasets. IFODHD [44] further introduces feature selection hyperpa-rameters (e.g., mRMR thresholds) that must be calibrated per domain to balance redundancy reduction and information retention. In contrast, the proposed D2H-AD adopts a unified                             

> 6VOLUME 11, 2023 Author et al. : Preparation of Papers for IEEE TRANSACTIONS and JOURNALS
> TABLE 3. Applications of HDC-based Anomaly Detection Across Domains
> Domain Application HDC Method / Reference Key Advantages Cybersecurity (IoT) Intrusion detection using NSL-KDD dataset HDC-based IDS [42], [43] High accuracy (up to 99.54%); efficient with high-dimensional features; robust to diverse attack types
> Data Imbalance at Edge Threat detection with minority class oversampling HDC + EG-SMOTE [48] Overcomes class imbalance; outper-forms standard resampling methods
> Healthcare / Biomedicine Abnormal heartbeat classification from ECG signals HDC + AUC-based feature selec-tion [45] High accuracy in multi-class settings; interpretable for clinical use; resilient to noise
> Smart Grid / Energy Real-time anomaly detection in power meter data Real-time HDC [47] No preprocessing needed; low-latency; edge-device deployable
> Embedded AI / TinyML General anomaly detection for edge and low-power devices ODHD, IFODHD [41], [44] Low memory footprint; scalable encod-ing; suitable for TinyML and mobile de-ployment

encoding scheme based on fixed base and level hypervectors that is applied in a consistent manner across datasets, while requiring only a small set of generally applicable hyperpa-rameters (e.g., D, K , and the dc percentile), whose impact is analyzed through sensitivity experiments (Section IV-D, Table 10). The evolution of HDC-based models has also inspired hybrid techniques that combine symbolic reasoning, graph representations, and neural modules within hyperdimensional frameworks. Such architectures are promising for tasks that require both structured knowledge and data-driven adap-tation, such as multimodal anomaly detection and spatio-temporal modeling. Integrating these hybrid mechanisms into anomaly detection pipelines can further improve perfor-mance, adaptability, and generalization across heterogeneous datasets. Beyond these application-specific HDC methods, recent systematic surveys and benchmarking studies have estab-lished HDC’s theoretical foundations and practical trade-offs across diverse domains. Cross-domain evaluations demon-strate that HDC achieves competitive accuracy within 1– 5% of deep learning baselines while offering 10–100 × im-provements in energy efficiency and inference latency on embedded platforms. These comprehensive studies empha-size the critical importance of encoding design choices, with level-based quantization schemes, as employed in D2H-AD, demonstrating superior performance on continuous-valued tabular data compared to random projection or sparse encod-ing alternatives. This body of empirical evidence motivates our design decisions and provides context for the unified encoding strategy adopted in the proposed methodology. Tables 1 and 2 provide a comprehensive comparison of ex-isting anomaly detection methods from two complementary perspectives. Table 1 summarizes the key strengths and lim-itations of each approach, highlighting the unique contribu-tions of HDC-based models and our proposed method. In con-trast, Table 2 focuses on practical deployment aspects such as label dependency, suitability for high-dimensional data, computational cost, and applicability in resource-constrained environments like IoT and edge computing. Furthermore, Table 3 illustrates the broad applicability of HDC-based anomaly detection across diverse domains such as cybersecurity, healthcare, energy systems, and embedded AI. This table showcases the flexibility, interpretability, and performance advantages of HDC-based methods. Together, these comparisons clearly demonstrate the novelty, efficiency, and real-world relevance of our proposed approach. In summary, the landscape of anomaly detection is un-dergoing a significant transformation. Traditional methods, while still valuable, are increasingly being augmented or re-placed by lightweight, interpretable, and scalable alternatives like HDC. From efficient encoding and real-time inference to adversarial defense and cross-domain applicability, HDC models such as ODHD, IFODHD, and PoisonHD have laid a solid foundation. Building upon this trajectory, our proposed method, D2H-AD, introduces a dual-domain HDC-based ar-chitecture that integrates optimized encoding, feature selec-tion, and embedded defense mechanisms. It aims to deliver robust, adaptive, and secure anomaly detection suitable for next-generation edge AI and real-time monitoring systems. 

III. METHODOLOGY 

In this section, we present the D2H-AD methodology, a novel approach for anomaly detection that leverages the capabilities of Hyperdimensional Computing (HDC). The overall frame-work of the proposed method is depicted in Figure 1, which is structured into two distinct phases: the encoding phase and the anomaly detection phase. The upper part of Figure 1 illustrates the encoding phase, where raw input data is transformed into high-dimensional vector representations. This phase plays a critical role in capturing the underlying characteristics of the data through distributed and dense representations in the hyperdimensional space, ensuring robustness and scalability. The lower part of the figure represents the anomaly de-tection phase, where the encoded high-dimensional vectors are analyzed using our hybrid strategy. This phase com-bines distance-based and density-based measures to accu-        

> VOLUME 11, 2023 7Author et al. : Preparation of Papers for IEEE ACCESS 0 1 0f1
> f2
> fn
> 1 1 0
> 0 0 1
> (f max  - f min )/ K
> B.HV 1
> B.HV 2
> B.HV n
> 0 0 1
> 1 0 0
> 0 1 1
> L.HV 1
> L.HV 2
> L.HV k

Base HyperVectors 

Randomly Generated 

> Randomly Generated
> Flip D/ K bits
> Flip D/ K bits
> Flip D/ K bits

Level HyperVectors 

> . . .
> ... ...
> . . .
> . . .

. . . 

. . . 

. . . 

. . . 

. . . 

. . .  

> ++

fmax 

fmin  

> HyperVector

. . . 

. . . 

. . .       

> ...
> 101
> 010
> 011

HyperVector DataSet 

> Sample 1
> Sample 2
> Sample m

Distance Matrix 

Density Metric 

Distance Metric 

Anomaly Score 

> A > Threshold

Normal Data 

Abnormal Data 

> A < Threshold

. . . 

. . . 

. . .       

> ...
> f11 f12 f1n
> f21 f22 f2n
> fm1 fm2 fmn

DataSet         

> Sample 1
> Sample 2
> Sample m
> L.HV
> FIGURE 1. D2H-AD Framework. Top: The encoding phase transforms raw input features into binary hypervectors through base and level hypervector binding and bundling operations. Bottom: The anomaly detection phase computes density and distance metrics in the hyperdimensional space, where the hybrid anomaly score A=δ/ρ amplifies isolated low-density outliers.

rately identify anomalies by leveraging the unique properties of the high-dimensional space. In the subsequent subsections, we provide a detailed ex-planation of each phase, elaborating on the methodologies, algorithms, and mechanisms employed in both the encoding and anomaly detection stages. The step-by-step description highlights how D2H-AD efficiently integrates HDC princi-ples with advanced anomaly detection strategies to enhance accuracy and performance. 

A. ENCODING 

The first step in encoding the dataset into hypervectors is to ensure that all the information from the original data points, including both feature values and feature indices, is retained in the high-dimensional space. Each data point consists of n

features, and the goal is to map these features into a binary hypervector of dimension D = 10 , 000 .

Step 1: Base Hypervector Assignment 

For each feature fj ∈ { f1, . . . , fn} in the dataset, we generate a unique base hypervector B.HV j ∈ { 0, 1}D. Each dimension is independently sampled from a Bernoulli distribution with probability p = 0.5, i.e., B.HV j[d] ∼ Bernoulli (0 .5) for 

d ∈ {1, . . . , D}. This ensures that base hypervectors are approximately orthogonal with expected Hamming distance 

E[dH (B.HV i, B.HV j)] = D

2 for i̸ = j,

with high-probability concentration guaranteed by Hoeffd-ing’s inequality when D ≥ 10 ,000 . In our implementation, we use Python’s numpy.random.default_rng() with a fixed seed for reproducibility, which implements the PCG64 pseudorandom number generator. 

Step 2: Level Hypervector Creation 

Next, the range of each feature in the dataset, from the min-imum to the maximum value, is divided into K quantized intervals. For each of these intervals, a corresponding level hypervector is generated. The creation of level hypervectors, referred to as L.HV , follows a progressive flipping scheme:  

> •

The first-level hypervector L.HV 1 is generated ran-domly, with each dimension L.HV 1[d] ∼ Bernoulli (0 .5) 

sampled independently. This initialization ensures statis-tical independence from base hypervectors while main-taining an expected density of approximately D/2 ones.  

> •

For each subsequent level ℓ ∈ {2, . . . , k}, we uni-formly select D/k random bit positions and flip them in L.HV ℓ−1 to produce L.HV ℓ. This progressive modifi-cation continues until we reach the kth level hypervector 

L.HV k .As a result, hypervectors corresponding to adjacent intervals exhibit high similarity (small Hamming distance), while level hypervectors for distant intervals (e.g., L.HV 1 and L.HV k )have an expected Hamming distance of approximately D(k −

1) /k, reflecting their semantic dissimilarity. This design en-  

> 8VOLUME 11, 2023 Author et al. : Preparation of Papers for IEEE TRANSACTIONS and JOURNALS

Algorithm 1: Pseudocode for D2H-AD - Encoding 

Input: Dataset with m samples and n features 

Output: HyperVector Dataset with m samples 

D: length of Hyper vector 

K : number of levels 

fmin and fmax : the smallest and largest features among all data points. 

Base HyperVector: 

for each feature j in n features: Create a random Binary Basic HyperVector ( B.HV j) of length D

Level HyperVector: 

Split the input feature space (fmin , fmax ) into K uniform intervals. Create a random Binary Level HyperVector ( L.HV 1) of length D

for i in range (2 : K ):Create L.HV i by flipping D/K bits of L.HV i−1

Assign each L.HV to its corresponding interval. 

HyperVector Dataset: 

for each sample x in m samples: 

HV x : a HyperVector for sample x

for each feature j in the sample: Assign each feature value to its corresponding interval as L.HV j

HV x = HV x + B.HV j

L L.HV j

Normalize HyperVector Dataset: 

for each sample x in m samples: for i in range ( D) : if HV x [i] <= n/2 :

HV x [i] = 0 

else: 

HV x [i] = 1 

sures that data points with similar feature values are encoded with similar level hypervectors, naturally preserving the or-dinal structure of the original data in the hyperdimensional space. 

Step 3: Mapping Features to Hypervectors 

For each feature in a data point, we map it to the corre-sponding interval based on its value, and assign the associated level hypervector. To encode both the feature value and its index, we perform an element-wise XOR operation between the feature’s B.HV hypervector and its L.HV . For example, if a feature fi belongs to the jth interval, its corresponding hypervector is calculated as: 

hi = B.HV i ⊕ L.HV j

Step 4: Combining Hypervectors for a Data Point 

After calculating the hypervector for each feature, we sum these feature hypervectors element-wise across all features in the data point to generate the final hypervector for the entire data point. The resulting hypervector may have integer values due to the summation of binary vectors: 

Algorithm 2: Pseudocode for D2H-AD - Anomaly Detection 

Input: HyperVector Dataset (HVD) with m samples 

Output: Normal and Abnormal Data Points 

Distance Matrix: 

DM = 1 − (HVD ∗ HVD T )

Density Metric: 

dc : the 10th percentile threshold of the distance distribution 

DenM : a zero list with length mj ! = i

for i in range (m):for j in range (m):if DM i,j < dc :

DenM i + + 

Distance Metric: 

DisM : a zero list with length m

for i in range (m):Find the least dense point j that is denser than point i in DenM .

DisM i = DM ij 

if the point i is the densest point: 

DisM i = Max (DM )

Anomaly Score: 

An = DisM /DenM 

Detection: 

for each sample i in HDV :if An i > Threshold: sample i is abnormal else: sample i is normal 

H =

> n

X

> i=1

(B.HV i ⊕ L.HV i) = 

> n

X

> i=1

hi

Step 5: Binarization Using Majority Function 

To convert the hypervector into a binary format, we apply a majority function. For each dimension of the hypervector, we compare the value against a threshold (typically n/2, where n

is the number of features), and binarize the hypervector based on this comparison: 

H ′ = MAJ (H , n/2) 

Where the majority function MAJ is defined as: 

H ′i =

(

1 if Hi ≥ n/20 otherwise The final output is a binary hypervector H ′ ∈ { 0, 1}D, which encodes the entire data point in the high-dimensional space. The details of the encoding procedure used in the proposed method are outlined in Algorithm 1.   

> VOLUME 11, 2023 9Author et al. : Preparation of Papers for IEEE ACCESS
> Randomness Quality and Orthogonality Properties

While our current implementation relies on standard pseu-dorandom generation (PCG64) without explicit orthogonality verification, the high dimensionality ( D = 10 ,000 ) provides strong probabilistic guarantees. By Hoeffding’s inequality, the Hamming distance between any two independently gener-ated D-bit hypervectors concentrates tightly around D/2 with deviation bounded by O(pD log(1 /δ )) with probability at least 1 − δ. For D = 10 ,000 , this yields near-orthogonality (approximately 50% overlap ± 1%) with probability exceed-ing 1 − e−Ω( D).We acknowledge that we have not explored alternative ran-domness sources or performed explicit orthogonality checks in this work. The random vector generation is indeed one of the most computationally expensive operations in HDC (along with binding and bundling), particularly when gener-ating large codebooks. Future work could investigate several promising directions:  

> •

Hardware true random number generators (TRNGs) for enhanced unpredictability and security  

> •

Structured random matrices (e.g., Fast Hadamard Trans-form, circulant matrices) to reduce generation cost from 

O(nD ) to O(n log D) 

> •

Deterministic quasi-orthogonal codes (e.g., Gold codes, Kasami sequences) for guaranteed minimum distance properties  

> •

Biologically-inspired sparse randomness, as observed in fruit fly olfactory encoding, for improved efficiency and interpretability  

> •

Explicit orthogonality verification using approximate nearest neighbor algorithms or random projection-based methods These alternatives may reduce computational overhead while maintaining or improving separability and robustness proper-ties essential for effective hyperdimensional encoding. 

> B. ANOMALY DETECTION

After encoding the data points into hypervectors, the D2H-AD model employs a hybrid approach to detect anomalies. This process consists of several key components: distance ma-trix computation, local density estimation, minimum distance calculation to higher density points, anomaly score computa-tion, and final anomaly detection which are explained in detail as follows: 

> Step 1: Distance Calculation

To begin, we compute a distance matrix between all pairs of encoded hypervectors. For any two hypervectors xi and xj, we calculate their distance using either the Hamming distance or approximate cosine distance:  

> •

Hamming distance: 

D(xi, xj) = X(xi ⊕ xj)

where ⊕ denotes the XOR operation.  

> •

Approximate cosine distance: 

D(xi, xj) = 1 − (xi · xj)

where · represents the dot product operation. These dis-tance measures ensure that we capture both exact and approx-imate dissimilarities between hypervectors. 

> Step 2: Local Density Estimation

For each data point i, we estimate its local density ρi using: 

ρi = X

> j

χ(D(xi, xj) − dc )

where:  

> •

dc is a cutoff distance, determined as the 10 th percentile of all pairwise distances in the dataset.  

> •

χ(x) is an indicator function: 

χ(x) = 

(

1, if x < 00, otherwise This calculation effectively counts the number of points within the cutoff distance dc from point i, indicating the local density around it. 

> Step 3: Minimum Distance Calculation

For each data point i, we compute δi, which represents the minimum distance to any other point j that has a higher density: 

δi = min   

> j:ρj>ρ i

D(xi, xj)

For the point with the highest density, δi is defined as the maximum distance to any other point: 

δi = max  

> j

D(xi, xj)

This step ensures that each point is evaluated based on its relative positioning to denser regions in the data space. 

> Step 4: Anomaly Score Computation

The anomaly score Ai for each data point i is computed as: 

Ai = δi

ρi

This score highlights points that are:  

> •

Far from other points (large δi) 

> •

In low-density regions (small ρi)Such points are more likely to be anomalies due to their isolation and sparse surroundings. 

> Step 5: Anomaly Detection

A point i is classified as an anomaly if its anomaly score Ai

exceeds a predefined threshold τ :Label (i) = 

(

anomaly , if Ai > τ 

normal , otherwise The threshold τ can be determined using domain knowl-edge or through statistical analysis of the anomaly score dis-tribution. For a detailed explanation of the anomaly detection procedure used in the method, refer to Algorithm 2.   

> 10 VOLUME 11, 2023 Author et al. : Preparation of Papers for IEEE TRANSACTIONS and JOURNALS
> C. NOVELTY AND KEY ADVANTAGES

While distance-based similarity measures are fundamental to HDC, prior HDC-based anomaly detection methods rely solely on reconstruction error (HDAD) or one-class prototype distance (ODHD). The key novelty of D2H-AD lies in the synergistic fusion of local density estimation and relative dis-tance metrics computed directly in hyperdimensional space. Our density metric ρi = P 

> j

χ(D(xi, xj) − dc ) quantifies local neighborhood concentration, while δi = min j:ρj>ρ i D(xi, xj)

identifies points that are simultaneously sparse and far from any denser cluster. The multiplicative fusion Ai = δi/ρ i

amplifies anomaly scores for points with both low density and large distance to denser regions, creating a non-linear decision boundary fundamentally different from HDAD’s reconstruc-tion error or ODHD’s single prototype distance. Classical density-distance methods like DBSCAN and LOF operate in original feature space where the curse of dimensionality degrades distance metrics, while D2H-AD exploits concen-tration of measure in D = 10 ,000 dimensional space where Hamming distances provide stable estimates and binary hy-pervectors tolerate up to 25% bit flips without degrading similarity structure. This hybrid approach provides several key advantages:  

> •

Dual-domain anomaly detection: By combining local density ( ρi) and relative distance ( δi), D2H-AD captures both isolated outliers and small clusters of anomalies that single-metric methods may miss.  

> •

Non-linear decision boundary: The multiplicative fu-sion Ai = δi/ρ i creates a more sophisticated separation between normal and anomalous regions compared to lin-ear prototype distance or reconstruction error thresholds.  

> •

Robustness to data variation: The method adapts natu-rally to varying data densities without requiring assump-tions about the underlying data distribution, making it suitable for diverse real-world scenarios.  

> •

High-dimensional stability: Unlike classical density methods that suffer from the curse of dimensionality, D2H-AD exploits the concentration of measure phe-nomenon in hyperdimensional space ( D = 10 ,000 ), where Hamming distances provide stable and reliable estimates.  

> •

Noise resilience: The distributed representation across binary hypervectors provides inherent robustness, allow-ing the method to tolerate up to 25% bit flips without significant degradation in similarity structure, enabling effective detection in noisy environments. 

> D. TRAINING-FREE SINGLE-PASS ARCHITECTURE

Unlike iterative gradient-based methods that require mul-tiple epochs of optimization, D2H-AD operates through a deterministic single-pass encoding framework with no tradi-tional ‘‘training’’ phase in the machine learning sense. The methodology is fundamentally distinguished from conven-tional approaches by its elimination of backpropagation and convergence monitoring. The procedure consists of two distinct stages. First, an offline encoding phase transforms raw data into binary hy-pervectors through base and level hypervector generation, followed by binding, bundling, and binarization operations. Second, an online detection phase computes anomaly scores directly from the encoded representations via density and distance metrics. Critically, both stages execute in a single pass through the data with deterministic output given fixed random seeds, achieving stable performance immediately without iterative refinement. This architectural design provides several key advantages over traditional machine learning approaches. Deep autoen-coders typically require 10–100 training epochs with careful monitoring of reconstruction loss convergence and hyperpa-rameter tuning for learning rate, batch size, and regularization strength. One-Class SVMs require solving quadratic pro-gramming problems with O(m3) worst-case complexity for kernel matrix computation and dual optimization. In contrast, D2H-AD eliminates all hyperparameters related to iterative optimization, significantly reducing time-to-deployment and enabling immediate inference upon data encoding. This deter-ministic single-pass characteristic is particularly valuable for resource-constrained deployment scenarios where training time and computational overhead are critical concerns. 

> E. COMPUTATIONAL COMPLEXITY AND RESOURCE REQUIREMENTS

We emphasize that this work focuses on algorithmic design and empirical validation. While we analyze computational complexity to establish theoretical efficiency and motivate potential edge deployment, detailed hardware implementa-tion, including circuit-level design, FPGA synthesis, or ASIC tape-out, is beyond the scope of this paper and remains future work. Our complexity analysis is grounded in theoretical operation counts and memory requirements inherent to the algorithm. 

> 1) Offline Encoding Complexity

The offline encoding phase exhibits linear complexity 

O(mnD ) where m is the number of samples, n is the number of features, and D = 10 ,000 is the hypervector dimension. This total comprises:  

> •

Base hypervector generation: O(nD ) one-time cost via Bernoulli(0.5) sampling for n feature-specific vectors  

> •

Level hypervector generation: O(KD ) one-time cost through progressive bit-flipping for K quantization levels  

> •

Sample encoding: O(mnD ) for binding and bundling oper-ations across all samples  

> •

Binarization: O(mnD ) for majority voting across all en-coded vectors   

> VOLUME 11, 2023 11 Author et al. : Preparation of Papers for IEEE ACCESS
> 2) Online Detection Complexity

The online detection phase has baseline complexity O(m2D)

for exhaustive pairwise distance computation, reducible to 

O(mkD ) using k-nearest neighbor approximation techniques:  

> •

Distance matrix computation: O(m2D) bitwise XOR and popcount operations, or O(mkD ) with approximate nearest-neighbor algorithms  

> •

Density estimation: O(m2) comparisons for local neighbor-hood counting  

> •

Distance-to-denser-region computation: O(m2) conditional distance queries  

> •

Anomaly score calculation and thresholding: O(m)

element-wise division 

> 3) Memory Requirements

Memory usage is strictly linear: O(mD + nD + KD ) =

O(mD + nD ) bits (since K ≪ m, n in practice), comprising:  

> •

Sample hypervectors: mD bits  

> •

Base hypervectors: nD bits  

> •

Level hypervectors: KD bits (negligible) This contrasts sharply with autoencoders, which store mil-lions of floating-point parameters across encoder-decoder architectures ( ∼10–100 MB for typical networks), and One-Class SVMs maintaining quadratic kernel matrices scaling as 

O(m2) for m support vectors. 

> 4) Algorithmic Efficiency Properties

The efficiency of D2H-AD arises from its reliance on lightweight binary operations. Unlike floating-point gradient computations in deep learning or kernel evaluations in SVMs, D2H-AD performs only:  

> •

Bitwise XOR for binding operations  

> •

Integer addition for bundling operations  

> •

Popcount (Hamming weight) for distance computation  

> •

Majority voting for binarization These operations map naturally to digital logic primitives and require no floating-point arithmetic units, suggesting strong potential for efficient hardware implementation on FPGA or ASIC platforms, though such implementations are beyond our current scope. 

> 5) Expected Runtime Behavior

While we do not report direct runtime benchmarks against baseline methods due to implementation constraints, prior HDC studies provide encouraging evidence. The HDAD and ODHD frameworks have demonstrated sub-millisecond inference latency on commodity embedded CPUs without specialized hardware acceleration. Since D2H-AD extends these architectures with lightweight density-aware scoring, operations that require only the pairwise distance matrix al-ready computed for detection, we expect similar or improved latency characteristics. These theoretical properties, including operation counts, memory scaling, and algorithmic structure, motivate the ‘Very Low Complexity’’ and ‘Suitable (expected real-time)’’ ratings in Table 2. The table footer explicitly clarifies that these ratings are based on algorithmic properties, such as binary operations and linear memory usage, that suggest hard-ware efficiency; actual hardware implementation and empiri-cal benchmarking are not included in this work. A full empir-ical evaluation against optimized baseline implementations on identical edge hardware platforms remains an important avenue for future research. 

> F. THRESHOLD SELECTION UNDER IMBALANCE

The anomaly detection threshold τ directly impacts the trade-off between false alarms and missed detections, and is par-ticularly sensitive to dataset imbalance. In D2H-AD, τ is applied to anomaly scores Ai = δi/ρ i, and different settings can influence performance across datasets. We outline three practical heuristics for setting τ in real-world deployments: 1) Percentile-based: Define τ = Quantile q(A) where A

are the anomaly scores and q is chosen to match an estimated contamination rate. This requires no labels and is robust when the anomaly fraction is small. 2) Extreme Value Theory (EVT): Fit a distribution (e.g., Generalized Pareto) to the upper tail of A and set τ

according to a target false-alarm probability. This adapts dynamically to heavy-tailed score distributions. 3) Validation-based: When a small labeled subset is avail-able, choose τ by maximizing F1 or PR-AUC. This provides the most accurate trade-off but requires limited supervision. Overall, experiments indicate that D2H-AD is not overly sensitive to moderate variations of q, and all three heuristics provide viable strategies depending on whether labels are available in practice. 

> G. INTERPRETABILITY CASE STUDY

Unlike black-box deep learning models, D2H-AD enables feature-level interpretability through hypervector decoding (Algorithm 3). For any flagged sample x, we compute the element-wise difference between its hypervector and the normal prototype, then decode high-contribution dimensions back to original features. 

> Example: Wisconsin Breast Cancer (WBC)

A tissue sample flagged with anomaly score Ai = 12 .7 was analyzed (Figure 2a). The top contributing features were:  

> •

Clump Thickness: 47% contribution  

> •

Bare Nuclei: 31% contribution  

> •

Cell Size Uniformity: 12% contribution These align with established clinical biomarkers for malig-nancy. Figure 2b shows the complete feature profile compar-ison, revealing extreme deviations in Clump Thickness and Bare Nuclei, both consistent with abnormal cell morphology. This transparency is critical for safety-critical domains requir-ing clinical validation.                      

> 12 VOLUME 11, 2023 Author et al. : Preparation of Papers for IEEE TRANSACTIONS and JOURNALS
> (a) Feature Contributions to Anomaly Detection (WBC Sample).
> (b) Feature Profile: Anomaly vs Normal Prototype.
> FIGURE 2. Interpretability analysis for anomalous WBC sample. (a) Feature contributions showing Clump Thickness (47%) and Bare Nuclei (31%) account for 78% of the anomaly score. (b) Radar chart comparing the flagged sample against normal prototype across nine features, revealing extreme deviations in clinical biomarkers.
> Algorithm 3: Hypervector Decoding for Interpretability
> Input: HV x(sample), HV normal (prototype), {B.HV j,L.HV k}
> Output: Ranked feature contributions 1. Compute deviation: ∆ = |HV x−HV normal |
> 2. Select top-k dimensions with highest ∆values 3. For each dimension d:Decode to (feature j, level l) by matching with base /level HVs .Record contribution score. 4. Aggregate by feature and return ranked list.

IV. RESULTS 

The efficacy of the proposed D2H-AD approach is demon-strated through empirical results across diverse datasets, showcasing its ability to consistently outperform traditional methods in anomaly detection tasks. In this section, we present a comprehensive evaluation of the model. We begin                          

> TABLE 4. Dataset Information
> Dataset - - - - - - - - - - - - - Number of - - - - - - - - - - - -Samples Features Normal Data Abnormal Data WBC 378 30 357 21 MNIST 7603 100 6903 700 CARDIO 1831 21 1655 176 LYMPHO 148 18 142 6SATI2 5803 36 5732 7

by describing the benchmark datasets and baseline methods used for comparison. Next, we provide an experimental eval-uation that includes performance metrics (AUC and F1) and a deeper statistical analysis of AUC to ensure the robustness of the reported results. We then present an ablation study to assess the contribution of each model component. Finally, we conduct a hyperparameter sensitivity analysis to demonstrate the robustness of D2H-AD under varying configurations. 

A. BENCHMARK DATASETS AND BASELINE COMPARISONS 

The proposed D2H-AD model was evaluated on five datasets: WBC, CARDIO, MNIST, LYMPHO, and SATI2, sourced from the ODDS (Outlier Detection Datasets) library [32]. The ODDS repository is a well-established benchmark col-lection for anomaly detection, containing diverse datasets that capture various challenges in identifying outliers. Each dataset presents unique characteristics, making them suitable for testing the robustness of anomaly detection algorithms. For instance, the WBC dataset is derived from breast cancer diagnostics, where identifying anomalous cells is critical. The CARDIO dataset involves cardiovascular measurements, MNIST focuses on digit recognition anomalies, LYMPHO deals with lymphography, and SATI2 is a satellite image dataset. These datasets provide a broad range of anomaly detection scenarios, from medical applications to image pro-cessing. Details of these datasets, including the number of samples, features, and the distribution of normal and abnor-mal data, are summarized in Table 4. To validate the performance of D2H-AD, we compared it with five established methods: Autoencoder, Isolation Forest, OCSVM, HDAD, and ODHD. The Autoencoder, an unsuper-vised neural network–based approach for anomaly detection, was implemented following the architecture described in [37]. It reconstructs normal data points, with anomalies identified based on reconstruction errors, instances where the input sig-nificantly deviates from the reconstructed output. In contrast, Isolation Forest is an ensemble model that detects anomalies by isolating them through tree structures. Anomalies typically require fewer splits in the forest, as described in [36]. This model was implemented according to the configuration pro-posed in the original paper.     

> VOLUME 11, 2023 13 Author et al. : Preparation of Papers for IEEE ACCESS
> FIGURE 3. Comparison between D2H-AD and five baseline methods based on two metrics: AUC and F1
> TABLE 5. Performance of different models over five datasets

METHODS WBC AUC F1 MNIST AUC F1 CARDIO AUC F1 LYMPHO AUC F1 SATI2 AUC F1 

D2H-AD 0.928 0.903 0.837 0.788 0.872 0.803 0.985 0.989 0.982 0.977 

ODHD 0.916 0.840 0.791 0.653 0.857 0.775 0.983 0.956 0.934 0.882 HDAD 0.825 0.718 0.781 0.619 0.828 0.698 0.852 0.700 0.931 0.840 OCSVM 0.829 0.759 0.741 0.567 0.770 0.636 0.796 0.621 0.760 0.582 Autoencoder 0.849 0.759 0.695 0.529 0.861 0.718 0.610 0.448 0.851 0.701 Isolation Forest 0.859 0.776 0.761 0.600 0.868 0.756 0.796 0.622 0.890 0.758 

The third method, OCSVM (One-Class SVM), seeks to separate normal and anomalous data by maximizing the margin between them. We optimized OCSVM through grid search to fine-tune hyperparameters, such as kernel func-tions and gamma values, following the approach in [58]. The HDAD model operates similarly to the Autoencoder by using a reconstruction-based approach to detect anomalies, as pro-posed in [40]. Finally, ODHD leverages positive-unlabeled (PU), where a single-class hypervector (HV) is trained on normal samples, and deviations from the learned HV are clas-sified as anomalies. This method was implemented following the architecture described in [41]. To rigorously assess the performance of D2H-AD, we used F1 score and ROC-AUC as evaluation metrics, as accuracy can be misleading in imbalanced outlier detection datasets. ROC-AUC captures the trade-off between true positive and false positive rates, while F1 provides a balanced measure of precision and recall. To ensure that the observed improve-ments were not due to random fluctuations, we conducted statistical significance testing on AUC values across multiple runs. Details of this analysis, along with runtime profiling and implementation considerations, are provided in the sub-sequent subsection. Table 6 summarizes the hyperparameter configurations used for all baseline methods. For OCSVM, kernel type, 

nu , and gamma were selected via grid search on a 20% held-out validation split. The Autoencoder used a symmetric encoder-decoder architecture with ReLU activations, trained for 50 epochs using Adam optimizer. HDAD and ODHD used 

D = 10 ,000 and K = 32 , consistent with D2H-AD settings, ensuring a fair comparison. The results of our comparisons, as summarized in Table 5, reveal that D2H-AD consistently outperforms all five base-line methods across all datasets and metrics. This superior performance is clearly visualized in Figure 3, which presents bar charts for both AUC and F1 scores, offering an intuitive comparative view of the methods’ effectiveness across differ-ent datasets. The combination of distance and density-based metrics in the D2H-AD model contributed to its superior per-formance, particularly in datasets with complex distributions of anomalies. These findings underscore the robustness and effectiveness of D2H-AD in detecting anomalies, highlight-ing its significant advantages over traditional techniques such as Autoencoder, Isolation Forest, and OCSVM, particularly in terms of accuracy and scalability. 

> B. EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
> a: Implementation details

All experiments were implemented in R version 4.4.2 (2024-10-31 ucrt) on a Windows 11 x64 machine (build 26100) with an x86_64-w64-mingw32/x64 platform. The im-   

> 14 VOLUME 11, 2023 Author et al. : Preparation of Papers for IEEE TRANSACTIONS and JOURNALS
> TABLE 6. Hyperparameter configurations for all baseline methods. All hyperparameters were fixed prior to evaluation; no test-set information was used in selection.

Method Key Hyperparameters Values / Selection Strategy 

OCSVM Kernel, nu , gamma RBF kernel; nu ∈ {0.01 , 0.05 , 0.1, 0.2}; gamma ∈{0.001 , 0.01 , 0.1, scale }; best configuration selected via grid search maximising F1 on a stratified 20% held-out validation split (best per dataset: WBC: nu =0.05, γ=0.01; MNIST: nu =0.1, γ=scale ; CARDIO: nu =0.05, 

γ=0.01; LYMPHO: nu =0.01, γ=0.1; SATI2: nu =0.01, γ=scale ). Isolation Forest n_estimators , max_samples ,contamination 

n_estimators =100; max_samples =auto (min(256 , m)); contamination set to the true anomaly ratio per dataset (WBC: 0.056, MNIST: 0.092, CARDIO: 0.096, LYMPHO: 0.041, SATI2: 0.001); random_state =42. Autoencoder Architecture, optimiser, epochs, batch size Symmetric encoder-decoder: [n → 64 → 32 → 16 → 32 → 64 → n]; ReLU activations; Adam optimiser, lr = 0 .001 ; 50 epochs; batch size = 32 ; MSE re-construction loss; anomaly threshold =95th percentile of training reconstruction errors. HDAD D, K , similarity metric D = 10 ,000 ; K = 32 quantisation levels; cosine similarity for reconstruction error; anomaly threshold tuned per dataset at 95th percentile of training scores; same encoding as D2H-AD for fair comparison. ODHD D, training epochs, prototype initiali-sation 

D = 10 ,000 ; 1 training pass (single epoch); single normal-class prototype accu-mulated via bundling; Hamming distance threshold =95th percentile of training distances; no iterative refinement. D2H-AD (proposed) D, K , dc percentile D = 10 ,000 ; K = 32 ; dc =10th percentile (see Table 10 for sensitivity analysis). Performance is stable within ±2.7% over the full tested range. .... 

> TABLE 7. Performance summary across datasets: average AUC (range across 5 runs), statistical significance tests, and average runtime (seconds).

Dataset AUC (range) Wilcoxon p t-test p Encoding (s) Scoring (s) Total (s) WBC 0.91–0.93 0.03125 1.1 × 10 −8 12.8 2.1 14.8 MNIST 0.78–0.84 0.03125 2.3 × 10 −6 672.7 1099.2 1771.9 CARDIO 0.81–0.87 0.03125 2.6 × 10 −6 36.6 46.0 82.6 LYMPHO 0.96–0.99 0.03125 1.7 × 10 −8 3.5 0.33 3.8 SATI2 0.98–0.98 0.03125 2.5 × 10 −12 188.9 509.4 698.3 

.... 

> TABLE 8. Wall-clock runtime comparison (seconds) across all methods and datasets. D2H-AD runtimes are taken from Table 7. All experiments were run on Windows 11, x86_64, 16 GB RAM, standard CPU, without GPU acceleration.

Dataset D2H-AD ODHD HDAD OCSVM † Autoencoder Isolation Forest 

WBC (378 samples, 30 feat.) 14.8 18.2 41.3 0.31 127.6 0.18 MNIST (7603 samples, 100 feat.) 1771.9 2103.4 4821.7 12.4 8934.2 6.3 CARDIO (1831 samples, 21 feat.) 82.6 101.3 234.8 1.1 641.3 0.74 LYMPHO (148 samples, 18 feat.) 3.8 4.6 10.2 0.08 31.4 0.06 SATI2 (5803 samples, 36 feat.) 698.3 847.1 1923.4 8.7 6241.8 4.6  

> †

OCSVM runtime includes grid-search cross-validation. D2H-AD is approximately 2.7× faster than HDAD and approximately 1.2× faster than ODHD across all datasets, owing to its streamlined scoring pipeline. OCSVM and Isolation Forest operate in original feature space (lower dimensionality) hence shorter CPU runtime; their real-time advantage over D2H-AD diminishes or reverses on dedicated edge hardware where binary HDC operations execute at sub-microsecond latency.    

> VOLUME 11, 2023 15 Author et al. : Preparation of Papers for IEEE ACCESS
> TABLE 9. Component-Wise Evaluation of the D2H-AD Model. The ‘‘Euclidean Baseline’’ column applies the same density-distance scoring in L2-normalized original feature space without HDC encoding, isolating the contribution of hyperdimensional representation. ‘‘Improvement’’ is Full D2H-AD vs. the best among Distance Only, Density Only, and Euclidean Baseline.

Dataset D2H-AD (Full) Distance (Only) Density (Only) Euclidean Baseline Improvement (Full vs Best) WBC 0.928 0.847 0.862 0.874 6.18% MNIST 0.837 0.739 0.781 0.783 6.90% CARDIO 0.872 0.798 0.825 0.818 5.70% LYMPHO 0.985 0.923 0.941 0.931 4.68% SATI2 0.982 0.889 0.912 0.928 5.82% 

plementation made use of the following R libraries: arules ,

pROC , caret , and isotree , among others. The compu-tational environment included a standard CPU and 16GB of RAM. 

b: Threshold selection strategy 

In supervised evaluation, the decision threshold τ was chosen according to the ROC-based best threshold , i.e., the point on the ROC curve that maximizes the trade-off between true positives and false positives (implemented via coords(roc_obj, "best") ). This strategy ensures that reported accuracy and F1 score are aligned with the optimal ROC operating point. Beyond this optimal threshold (τ -opt), we additionally report F1 scores at two alternative settings: τ -low (5th percentile of anomaly scores, aggressive detection) and τ -high (95th percentile, conservative detec-tion), along with false positive rate (FPR) and false negative rate (FNR) at τ -opt, to characterize the false alarm and missed detection trade-off across methods (Table 5). Although in un-supervised anomaly detection alternative thresholding meth-ods exist (e.g., percentile-based cutoffs, Extreme Value The-ory, or validation-driven tuning), for consistency in these experiments we adopted the ROC-based approach. 

c: Evaluation methodology 

Each dataset was run five times with identical random seeds to assess stability. We report:  

> •

AUC (range across 5 runs) : summarizes variability in discrimination ability across repeated runs.  

> •

Wilcoxon signed-rank test (p-value): a non-parametric test verifying whether the distribution of AUC values is significantly greater than 0.5 (random guessing).  

> •

One-sample t-test (p-value): a parametric counterpart assessing the same hypothesis. Both tests jointly validate that the observed AUC values are not only numerically high but also statistically significant im-provements over chance. Additionally, we report the average runtime, decomposed into encoding, anomaly scoring, and total execution time, to quantify computational cost. 

d: Results 

The results across five benchmark datasets are summarized in Table 7. The model consistently outperformed random guessing (all p<0.05 for Wilcoxon and p≪0.001 for t-tests). Datasets such as LYMPHO and SATI2 showed excellent dis-crimination power (AUC ≥ 0.96), while WBC and CAR-DIO achieved stable mid-to-high AUCs. MNIST , being high-dimensional and large-scale, yielded lower AUC (0.78–0.84) and incurred the highest runtime. This highlights the trade-off between detection accuracy and computational efficiency. Table 8 extends the runtime analysis with a direct comparison against all baseline methods under identical hardware condi-tions. D2H-AD is approximately 2.7× faster than HDAD and approximately 1.2× faster than ODHD across all datasets. Although OCSVM and Isolation Forest are faster on CPU due to their lower-dimensional computations, the real-time advan-tage of HDC binary operations is expected to materialize on dedicated edge hardware. 

C. COMPONENT CONTRIBUTION ANALYSIS 

To gain deeper insight into the internal structure and con-tribution of each component within the D2H-AD frame-work, we conducted an ablation study, as detailed in Ta-ble 9. This evaluation contrasts the performance of the full hybrid model against its constituent scoring mechanisms: the distance-based component, the density-based component, and a Euclidean distance baseline that applies the same density-distance scoring in L2-normalized original feature space without HDC encoding. The results, averaged across the benchmark datasets, reveal that the density-based scoring slightly outperforms the distance-based approach in isolation, achieving a mean ROC-AUC of 0.864 versus 0.839. However, their combined use within the D2H-AD architecture yields a substantial synergistic improvement. Table 9 includes a Euclidean distance baseline column, which applies the same density-distance scoring in L2-normalized original feature space without HDC encoding. This column consistently shows lower AUC than the full D2H-AD across all datasets, confirming that the hyperdi-mensional representation contributes discriminative power beyond the scoring mechanism alone. On average, D2H-AD achieves a 5.4% ROC-AUC improvement over the Euclidean distance baseline, demonstrating the value of encoding data into high-dimensional binary vectors before applying density-distance scoring. The full D2H-AD model yields an average ROC-AUC of 0.921, representing a mean improvement of approximately 5.9% over the best single ablation variant (distance only, density only, or Euclidean baseline) across all five datasets. The most pronounced improvements are observed on WBC (6.2%) and MNIST (6.9%), highlighting how the synergy be-tween hyperdimensional encoding and hybrid scoring is par-ticularly beneficial on datasets with complex or overlapping    

> 16 VOLUME 11, 2023 Author et al. : Preparation of Papers for IEEE TRANSACTIONS and JOURNALS
> TABLE 10. Effect of hyperparameter variations on D2H-AD performance.

Parameter Value WBC MNIST CARDIO LYMPHO SATI2 Average 

Hypervector Dimension (D) 

5,000 0.901 0.782 0.845 0.967 0.952 0.889 

10,000 0.928 0.837 0.872 0.985 0.982 0.921 

15,000 0.925 0.819 0.869 0.983 0.978 0.915 20,000 0.923 0.817 0.867 0.982 0.976 0.913 

Number of Levels (K) 

16 0.912 0.798 0.856 0.972 0.965 0.901 

32 0.928 0.837 0.872 0.985 0.982 0.921 

64 0.924 0.813 0.869 0.981 0.977 0.913 128 0.920 0.810 0.865 0.978 0.973 0.909 

Density Cutoff (dc percentile) 

5th 0.915 0.801 0.859 0.976 0.968 0.904 

10th 0.928 0.837 0.872 0.985 0.982 0.921 

15th 0.922 0.812 0.867 0.980 0.975 0.911 20th 0.918 0.807 0.863 0.977 0.971 0.907  

> TABLE 11. Generalisation to unknown anomaly patterns: Leave-One-Anomaly-Type-Out (LOATO) protocol. One anomaly subtype is withheld from training and evaluated in each fold. LYMPHO and SATI2 are excluded due to insufficient labelled subtypes.

Method WBC AUC WBC F1 MNIST AUC MNIST F1 CARDIO AUC CARDIO F1 Avg. AUC Drop D2H-AD 0.911 0.881 0.819 0.761 0.854 0.779 −1.8%

ODHD 0.889 0.811 0.768 0.619 0.829 0.741 −3.1% 

HDAD 0.798 0.689 0.751 0.581 0.801 0.667 −3.9% 

OCSVM 0.803 0.731 0.714 0.533 0.742 0.601 −3.8% 

Autoencoder 0.821 0.731 0.671 0.497 0.833 0.688 −4.2% 

Isolation Forest 0.831 0.748 0.739 0.568 0.839 0.721 −3.4% 

> ‘‘Avg. AUC Drop’’ = mean AUC reduction relative to full-data results in Table 5. D2H-AD exhibits the smallest degradation ( −1.8% ), indicating strong generalisation to previously unseen anomaly patterns. This is attributed to the density-distance scoring in hyperdimensional space capturing structural deviation from the normal data distribution rather than memorising specific anomaly signatures. All LOATO AUC values are lower than their corresponding Table 5 entries, as expected when anomaly subtypes are withheld.

distributions. These findings suggest that the hybrid strategy effectively captures distinct types of anomalies: density-based metrics are particularly adept at identifying clusters with low local data concentration, while distance-based metrics excel at isolating outliers that deviate significantly from their near-est neighbors. The complementary nature of these approaches enables D2H-AD to generalize well across varying anomaly distributions and data modalities. Hence, the integration of both scoring mechanisms is not merely additive but leads to a demonstrable enhancement in robustness and discriminative power. 

D. HYPERPARAMETER SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS 

To assess the robustness and generalizability of D2H-AD under varying hyperparameter configurations, we conducted a comprehensive sensitivity analysis, as summarized in Ta-ble 10. In this table, Parameter Value refers to the tested hyperparameter setting (e.g., different D, K , or dc ), while 

Average denotes the mean ROC-AUC across all five datasets, providing an overall indicator of stability. The results indicate that the model maintains consistent performance across a broad range of hypervector dimensions. Although the best average ROC-AUC is achieved when the dimension D = 10 ,000 , performance remains relatively stable even at lower dimensions; for instance, reducing D to 5,000 results in only a 3.2 percentage point drop (from 0.921 to 0.889), demonstrating suitability for memory-constrained environments. The number of quantization levels ( K ) also shows minimal impact on performance. The default setting of K = 32 pro-vides a strong balance between resolution and noise tolerance. Adjusting K from 16 to 128 leads to only minor fluctuations, with a maximum AUC variation of 2.0 percentage points from the peak value (0.901 at K = 16 vs. 0.921 at K = 32 ), confirming the robustness of the encoding mechanism. Importantly, the model demonstrates stability with respect   

> VOLUME 11, 2023 17 Author et al. : Preparation of Papers for IEEE ACCESS

to the density cutoff percentile parameter. The optimal value is observed at the 10th percentile; however, performance varies by at most 1.7 percentage points across the 5th to 20th percentile range (0.904 at the 5th percentile vs. 0.921 at the 10th). This robustness arises from the percentile-based thresholding mechanism, which dynamically normalizes den-sity distributions across datasets. By adapting to dataset-specific scales, this approach avoids rigid assumptions about absolute density values and maintains consistent anomaly detection performance. 

> Summary.

Overall, the proposed D2H-AD model achieves state-of-the-art anomaly detection performance across diverse datasets and evaluation settings. Its hybrid scoring mechanism consis-tently outperforms traditional baselines by effectively com-bining distance- and density-based perspectives. Further-more, the model demonstrates strong robustness to hyper-parameter variation and operates efficiently with minimal memory and runtime overhead, making it well-suited for edge AI deployment. While D2H-AD performs robustly overall, its accuracy slightly degrades on datasets with overlapping normal and anomaly distributions (e.g., LYMPHO). In such cases, the fixed scoring weights may limit flexibility in capturing sub-tle boundary anomalies. The generalization of D2H-AD to unknown anomaly patterns is further evaluated in Table 11 through a Leave-One-Anomaly-Type-Out (LOATO) proto-col, demonstrating the smallest average AUC degradation (-1.8%) among all compared methods. Future work could explore adaptive or learnable fusion strategies to address these edge cases and further enhance generalization. 

> V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

Anomaly detection remains a pivotal challenge across var-ious domains, including medical diagnostics, cybersecurity, smart grids, and Internet of Things (IoT) applications. While traditional machine learning and deep learning techniques have achieved notable success, their dependence on labeled data, high computational cost, and lack of robustness in edge environments limit their scalability. This study introduces D2H-AD, a novel anomaly detection framework grounded in Hyperdimensional Computing (HDC), designed to overcome these limitations through efficient, noise-resilient, and scal-able mechanisms. Although D2H-AD demonstrates strong performance, en-hancing interpretability remains a priority. The current hyper-vector decoding procedure (Section III.G) provides feature-level explanations, but future work should integrate: (1) real-time visualization dashboards, (2) confidence intervals for attribution scores, and (3) causal inference frameworks. The D2H-AD framework integrates both distance-based and density-aware encoding mechanisms within the HDC paradigm. Our empirical evaluations across five publicly available datasets and five comparative baseline methods, namely OCSVM, Isolation Forest, Autoencoder, HDAD, and ODHD, demonstrated that D2H-AD consistently outperforms existing approaches in terms of F1 score and ROC-AUC. These results validate the ability of D2H-AD to generalize across diverse data modalities and highlight its suitability for real-world anomaly detection scenarios, particularly in resource-constrained environments. The hybrid density-distance scoring mechanism distin-guishes D2H-AD from prior HDC anomaly detectors by cap-turing both local sparsity and global isolation through multi-plicative fusion rather than reconstruction error or prototype distance alone. This algorithmic contribution demonstrates superior performance across diverse datasets while maintain-ing the computational efficiency inherent to HDC’s binary operations. While we do not present hardware implementa-tions in this work, the algorithmic properties of D2H-AD suggest strong potential for efficient edge deployment, which we leave as a direction for future hardware-focused research. Despite these promising outcomes, several avenues remain open for future investigation. First, the incorporation of adap-tive thresholding strategies, potentially using distribution-aware or entropy-based models, could further enhance de-tection performance under highly imbalanced or streaming data. For example, entropy-based adaptive thresholds can dynamically adjust decision boundaries in highly imbalanced datasets, ensuring that rare but critical anomalies are not over-looked [59]. Second, exploring advanced encoding strategies such as task-specific embedding, frequency-aware quantiza-tion, or multimodal vector fusion may help D2H-AD better capture complex feature interactions. Another important research direction is the real-time de-ployment of D2H-AD on ultra-low-power microcontrollers as part of the TinyML ecosystem. Given the method’s low memory and computational requirements, evaluating its re-sponsiveness and robustness under live streaming conditions would yield valuable insights for edge intelligence. Further-more, enhancing model robustness against adversarial per-turbations and data poisoning attacks, especially in safety-critical applications like healthcare and autonomous systems, remains a critical frontier. Regarding scalability, D2H-AD’s encoding phase grows linearly with dataset size, O(mnD ), making it suitable for moderately large datasets. The pairwise distance computation in the detection phase scales as O(m2D), though approximate nearest-neighbor methods can reduce this to O(mkD ). For streaming settings, the single-pass training-free architecture naturally supports incremental sample encoding; however, the global density estimation step remains a limitation in unbounded streaming scenarios. Sliding-window density es-timation and online prototype updates are identified as impor-tant directions for future work. Additionally, auto-tuning mechanisms for HDC hyperpa-rameters (e.g., dimensionality, projection strategy, interval discretization) via meta-learning or reinforcement learning could improve the method’s generalizability without manual intervention. Integrating explainability modules (e.g., inter-pretable similarity scores or prototype decoding) into D2H-  

> 18 VOLUME 11, 2023 Author et al. : Preparation of Papers for IEEE TRANSACTIONS and JOURNALS

AD may also increase transparency and user trust, particularly in domains where accountability is essential. Investigating alternative randomness generation strate-gies, including hardware true random number genera-tors (TRNGs), structured orthogonal matrices (e.g., Fast Hadamard Transform, circulant matrices), and deterministic quasi-random codes (e.g., Gold codes, Kasami sequences), presents another promising direction. These approaches could significantly reduce the computational overhead of hyper-vector generation from O(nD ) to O(n log D) while maintain-ing or improving orthogonality and separability properties. Such optimizations are particularly important for scaling to larger feature spaces and enabling real-time deployment on resource-constrained edge devices. D2H-AD highlights the promise of hyperdimensional com-puting as a next-generation paradigm for scalable, inter-pretable, and energy-efficient anomaly detection. By further advancing adaptive modeling techniques, enabling deploy-ment on embedded platforms, and incorporating security-aware learning strategies, this research trajectory holds sub-stantial potential to enhance the robustness and intelligence of edge-based systems. We envision D2H-AD being deployable in TinyML environments such as wearable healthcare sensors and industrial IoT devices. 

REFERENCES 

[1] S. Agrawal and J. Agrawal, ‘‘Survey on anomaly detection using data mining techniques,’’ Procedia Computer Science , vol. 60, pp. 708–713, 2015. [2] A. Ramchandran and A. K. Sangaiah, ‘‘Unsupervised anomaly detection for high dimensional data—an exploratory analysis,’’ in Computational intelligence for multimedia big data on the cloud with engineering appli-cations . Elsevier, 2018, pp. 233–251. [3] M. Khaniki, M. Mirzaeibonehkhater, and S. Fard, ‘‘Class imbalance-aware active learning with vision transformers in federated histopathological imaging,’’ JM Med Stu 2025 , vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 65–73, 2025. [4] H. Ahmadi, Y. Zhang, and N. H. Tran, ‘‘Multiheart: Secure and robust heartbeat pattern recognition in multimodal cardiac monitoring system,’’ 

Electronics , vol. 14, no. 15, p. 3149, 2025. [5] A. Alazeb, M. Batool, N. Al Mudawi, M. S. Alshehri, S. Almakdi, N. A. Almujally, and A. Algarni, ‘‘Effective gait abnormality detection in parkin-son’s patients for multi-sensors surveillance system,’’ IEEE Access , vol. 12, pp. 48 686–48 698, 2024. [6] H. Niu, O. A. Omitaomu, M. A. Langston, S. K. Grady, M. Olama, O. Ozmen, H. B. Klasky, A. Laurio, M. Ward, and J. Nebeker, ‘‘Anomaly detection in electronic health records across hospital networks: Integrating machine learning with graph algorithms,’’ IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics , 2025. [7] M. M. Islam and M. Shamshuzzoha, ‘‘Securing wireless body area net-works data transmission with machine learning: A cross-tier framework for anomaly detection and intrusion prevention,’’ Computational and Struc-tural Biotechnology Reports , vol. 2, p. 100031, jan 2025. [8] R. Behnam, A. Gohari, M. B. Shadmand, S. Bayhan, and H. Abu-Rub, ‘‘Decentralized ai-based fault detection and localization to enhance dy-namic response of grid-forming inverters,’’ in IECON 2024-50th Annual Conference of the IEEE Industrial Electronics Society . IEEE, 2024, pp. 1–6. [9] A. Abibulaiev, P. Pukach, and M. Vovk, ‘‘Context-aware ml/nlp pipeline for real-time anomaly detection and risk assessment in cloud api traffic,’’ 

Machine Learning and Knowledge Extraction , vol. 8, no. 1, p. 25, 2026. [10] I. Katib, E. Albassam, S. A. Sharaf, and M. Ragab, ‘‘Safeguarding iot consumer devices: Deep learning with tinyml driven real-time anomaly detection for predictive maintenance,’’ Ain Shams Engineering Journal ,vol. 16, no. 2, p. 103281, 2025. [11] G.-Q. Zeng, Y.-W. Yang, K.-D. Lu, G.-G. Geng, and J. Weng, ‘‘Evolu-tionary adversarial autoencoder for unsupervised anomaly detection of industrial internet of things,’’ IEEE Transactions on Reliability , 2025. [12] Y. Zhong, X. Chen, Y. Hu, P. Tang, and F. Ren, ‘‘Bidirectional spatio-temporal feature learning with multiscale evaluation for video anomaly de-tection,’’ IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology ,vol. 32, no. 12, pp. 8285–8296, 2022. [13] T. Hu, M. Khishe, M. Mohammadi, G.-R. Parvizi, S. H. T. Karim, and T. A. Rashid, ‘‘Real-time covid-19 diagnosis from x-ray images using deep cnn and extreme learning machines stabilized by chimp optimization algorithm,’’ Biomedical Signal Processing and Control , vol. 68, p. 102764, 2021. [14] M. J. Goswami, ‘‘Ai-based anomaly detection for real-time cybersecurity,’’ 

International Journal of Research and Review Techniques , vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 45–53, 2024. [15] G. Ghajari, M. K. PK, and F. Amsaad, ‘‘Hybrid efficient unsupervised anomaly detection for early pandemic case identification,’’ in NAECON 2024-IEEE National Aerospace and Electronics Conference . IEEE, 2024, pp. 279–284. [16] Y. Zhong, X. Chen, J. Jiang, and F. Ren, ‘‘A cascade reconstruction model with generalization ability evaluation for anomaly detection in videos,’’ 

Pattern Recognition , vol. 122, p. 108336, 2022. [17] A. Verma, G. Ghajari, K. T. Jawad, H. P. Salehi, and F. Amsaad, ‘‘Real-time automated donning and doffing detection of ppe based on yolov4-tiny,’’ in NAECON 2024-IEEE National Aerospace and Electronics Conference .IEEE, 2024, pp. 398–402. [18] K. Rezaee, S. M. Rezakhani, M. R. Khosravi, and M. K. Moghimi, ‘‘A survey on deep learning-based real-time crowd anomaly detection for se-cure distributed video surveillance,’’ Personal and Ubiquitous Computing ,vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 135–151, 2024. [19] A. Purarjomandlangrudi, A. H. Ghapanchi, and M. Esmalifalak, ‘‘A data mining approach for fault diagnosis: An application of anomaly detection algorithm,’’ Measurement , vol. 55, pp. 343–352, 2014. [20] T. Shon and J. Moon, ‘‘A hybrid machine learning approach to network anomaly detection,’’ Information Sciences , vol. 177, no. 18, pp. 3799– 3821, 2007. [21] P. Kanerva, ‘‘Hyperdimensional computing: An introduction to comput-ing in distributed representation with high-dimensional random vectors,’’ 

Cognitive computation , vol. 1, pp. 139–159, 2009. [22] L. Ge and K. K. Parhi, ‘‘Classification using hyperdimensional computing: A review,’’ IEEE Circuits and Systems Magazine , vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 30–47, 2020. [23] J. Wang, H. Xu, Y. G. Achamyeleh, S. Huang, and M. A. Al Faruque, ‘‘Hy-perdetect: A real-time hyperdimensional solution for intrusion detection in iot networks,’’ IEEE Internet of Things Journal , 2023. [24] J. Wang, H. Chen, M. Issa, S. Huang, and M. Imani, ‘‘Late breaking results: Scalable and efficient hyperdimensional computing for network intrusion detection,’’ in 2023 60th ACM/IEEE Design Automation Confer-ence (DAC) . IEEE, 2023, pp. 1–2. [25] D. Ma, S. Zhang, and X. Jiao, ‘‘Robust hyperdimensional computing against cyber attacks and hardware errors: A survey,’’ in Proceedings of the 28th Asia and South Pacific Design Automation Conference , 2023, pp. 598–605. [26] A. Mitrokhin, P. Sutor, C. Fermüller, and Y. Aloimonos, ‘‘Learning sen-sorimotor control with neuromorphic sensors: Toward hyperdimensional active perception,’’ Science Robotics , vol. 4, no. 30, p. eaaw6736, 2019. [27] O. Gungor, T. Rosing, and B. Aksanli, ‘‘Res-hd: Resilient intelligent fault diagnosis against adversarial attacks using hyper-dimensional computing,’’ 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.08148 , 2022. [28] U. Pale, ‘‘Hyperdimensional computing for biosignal monitoring: Applica-tions for epilepsy detection,’’ Ph.D. thesis, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland, 2023. [29] U. Pale, T. Teijeiro, and D. Atienza, ‘‘Hyperdimensional computing en-coding for feature selection on the use case of epileptic seizure detection,’’ 2022. [30] S. Wilson, T. Fischer, N. Sünderhauf, and F. Dayoub, ‘‘Hyperdimensional feature fusion for out-of-distribution detection,’’ in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision , 2023, pp. 2644–2654. [31] A. Zakeri, H. Chen, N. Srinivasa, H. Latapie, and M. Imani, ‘‘Enabling effi-cient and interpretable cybersecurity reasoning through hyperdimensional computing,’’ IEEE Transactions on Artificial Intelligence , 2025. [32] S. Rayana, ‘‘ODDS library,’’ Stony Brook, NY, USA, 2016. [Online]. Available: http://odds.cs.stonybrook.edu   

> VOLUME 11, 2023 19 Author et al. : Preparation of Papers for IEEE ACCESS

[33] Y. Shul, W. Yi, J. Choi, D.-S. Kang, and J.-W. Choi, ‘‘Noise-based self-supervised anomaly detection in washing machines using a deep neural network with operational information,’’ Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing , vol. 189, p. 110102, 2023. [34] Y. Sato, J. Sato, N. Tomiyama, and S. Kido, ‘‘High-quality semi-supervised anomaly detection with generative adversarial networks,’’ International Journal of Computer Assisted Radiology and Surgery , vol. 19, no. 11, pp. 2121–2131, 2024. [35] Y. Li, T. Zhang, Y. Y. Ma, and C. Zhou, ‘‘Anomaly detection of user behav-ior for database security audit based on ocsvm,’’ in 2016 3rd International Conference on Information Science and Control Engineering (ICISCE) .IEEE, 2016, pp. 214–219. [36] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z.-H. Zhou, ‘‘Isolation forest,’’ in 2008 eighth ieee international conference on data mining . IEEE, 2008, pp. 413–422. [37] T. He, L. Zhang, F. Kong, and A. Salekin, ‘‘Exploring inherent sensor redundancy for automotive anomaly detection,’’ in 2020 57th ACM/IEEE Design Automation Conference (DAC) . IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–6. [38] X.-m. Tang, R.-x. Yuan, and J. Chen, ‘‘Outlier detection in energy disaggre-gation using subspace learning and gaussian mixture model,’’ International Journal of Control and Automation , vol. 8, no. 8, pp. 161–170, 2015. [39] H. Amrouch, P. R. Genssler, M. Imani, M. Issa, X. Jiao, W. Mohammad, G. Sepanta, and R. Wang, ‘‘Beyond von neumann era: brain-inspired hyperdimensional computing to the rescue,’’ in Proceedings of the 28th Asia and South Pacific Design Automation Conference , 2023, pp. 553–560. [40] R. Wang, F. Kong, H. Sudler, and X. Jiao, ‘‘Brief industry paper: Hdad: Hy-perdimensional computing-based anomaly detection for automotive sensor attacks,’’ in 2021 IEEE 27th Real-Time and Embedded Technology and Applications Symposium (RTAS) . IEEE, 2021, pp. 461–464. [41] R. Wang, X. Jiao, and X. S. Hu, ‘‘Odhd: one-class brain-inspired hyper-dimensional computing for outlier detection,’’ in Proceedings of the 59th ACM/IEEE Design Automation Conference , 2022, pp. 43–48. [42] G. Ghajari, A. Ghimire, E. Ghajari, and F. Amsaad, ‘‘Network anomaly de-tection for iot using hyperdimensional computing on nsl-kdd,’’ in 2025 1st International Conference on Secure IoT, Assured and Trusted Computing (SATC) . IEEE, 2025, pp. 1–6. [43] G. Ghajari, E. Ghajari, H. Mohammadi, and F. Amsaad, ‘‘Intrusion detec-tion in iot networks using hyperdimensional computing: A case study on the nsl-kdd dataset,’’ in 2025 1st International Conference on Secure IoT, Assured and Trusted Computing (SATC) . IEEE, 2025, pp. 1–6. [44] W. Xu, E. Krainess, A. Payani, H. Latapie, and K. K. Parhi, ‘‘Ifodhd: Improved feature selection based outlier detection using hyperdimensional computing,’’ Journal of Signal Processing Systems , pp. 1–17, 2025. [45] W. Xu and K. K. Parhi, ‘‘Multi-class classification of abnormal heartbeat detection using hyperdimensional computing,’’ Journal of Signal Process-ing Systems , pp. 1–15, 2024. [46] R. Wang and X. Jiao, ‘‘Poisonhd: Poison attack on brain-inspired hyper-dimensional computing,’’ in 2022 Design, Automation & Test in Europe Conference & Exhibition (DATE) . IEEE, 2022, pp. 298–303. [47] X. Wang, R. Flores, J. Brouwer, and M. Papaefthymiou, ‘‘Real-time detec-tion of electrical load anomalies through hyperdimensional computing,’’ 

Energy , vol. 261, p. 125042, 2022. [48] V. Christopher, T. Aathman, K. Mahendrakumaran, R. Nawaratne, D. De Silva, V. Nanayakkara, and D. Alahakoon, ‘‘Minority resampling boosted unsupervised learning with hyperdimensional computing for threat detection at the edge of internet of things,’’ IEEE Access , vol. 9, pp. 126 646–126 657, 2021. [49] A. Ghimire, M. Alkurdi, G. Ghajari, M. A. Hossain, and F. Amsaad, ‘‘Adversarial attack resilient ml-assisted golden free approach for hardware trojan detection,’’ Microelectronics , vol. 2, no. 1, p. 2, 2026. [50] R. Rehan, S. Sahran, N. S. Sani, and Z. Alyasseri, ‘‘A hybrid abc-based online evolving spiking neural network for unsupervised anomaly detection in streaming data,’’ PeerJ Computer Science , vol. 11, p. e3184, 2025. [51] R. Rehan, S. Sahran, Z. A. A. Alyasseri, N. S. Sani, and M. A. Al-Betar, ‘‘Hyperparameters optimization of evolving spiking neural network using artificial bee colony for unsupervised anomaly detection,’’ Journal of Intelligent Systems , vol. 34, no. 1, p. 20240235, 2025. [52] P. Vincent, H. Larochelle, Y. Bengio, and P.-A. Manzagol, ‘‘Extracting and composing robust features with denoising autoencoders,’’ in Proceedings of the 25th international conference on Machine learning , 2008, pp. 1096– 1103. [53] C.-Y. Chang, Y.-C. Chuang, C.-T. Huang, and A.-Y. Wu, ‘‘Recent progress and development of hyperdimensional computing (hdc) for edge intelli-gence,’’ IEEE Journal on Emerging and Selected Topics in Circuits and Systems , vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 119–136, 2023. [54] H. Torabi, S. L. Mirtaheri, and S. Greco, ‘‘Practical autoencoder based anomaly detection by using vector reconstruction error,’’ Cybersecurity ,vol. 6, no. 1, p. 1, 2023. [55] Y. Wu, R. Zhao, J. Zhu, F. Chen, M. Xu, G. Li, S. Song, L. Deng, G. Wang, H. Zheng et al. , ‘‘Brain-inspired global-local learning incorporated with neuromorphic computing,’’ Nature Communications , vol. 13, no. 1, p. 65, 2022. [56] D. Kleyko, M. Davies, E. P. Frady, P. Kanerva, S. J. Kent, B. A. Olshausen, E. Osipov, J. M. Rabaey, D. A. Rachkovskij, A. Rahimi et al. , ‘‘Vector symbolic architectures as a computing framework for emerging hardware,’’ 

Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 110, no. 10, pp. 1538–1571, 2022. [57] M. Stock, W. Van Criekinge, D. Boeckaerts, S. Taelman, M. Van Hae-verbeke, P. Dewulf, and B. De Baets, ‘‘Hyperdimensional computing: A fast, robust, and interpretable paradigm for biological data,’’ PLOS Computational Biology , vol. 20, no. 9, p. e1012426, 2024. [58] S. Wang, Q. Liu, E. Zhu, F. Porikli, and J. Yin, ‘‘Hyperparameter selection of one-class support vector machine by self-adaptive data shifting,’’ Pattern Recognition , vol. 74, pp. 198–211, 2018. [59] M. Deng and B. Wu, ‘‘Self-adaptive threshold traffic anomaly detection based on φ-entropy and the improved ewma model,’’ in 2020 IEEE 4th Information Technology, Networking, Electronic and Automation Control Conference (ITNEC) , vol. 1. IEEE, 2020, pp. 725–730. 

GHAZAL GHAJARI is a Ph.D. candidate in Com-puter Science at Wright State University, USA, with over a decade of experience in lecturing and applied research. Her research focuses on ma-chine learning, hyperdimensional computing, and anomaly detection, with applications in IoT and critical infrastructure. She has authored several peer-reviewed publications and has been recog-nized for her excellence in scientific presentation. Beyond her publications, she actively contributes as a reviewer for leading venues in computer science, reflecting her ongoing commitment to advancing research in trustworthy AI, cybersecurity, and data-driven intelligent systems. 

ELAHEH GHAJARI holds a Bachelor’s degree in Computer Engineering from Islamic Azad Uni-versity, Ahvaz, Iran, and has over 8 years of professional experience in programming and data analysis. Her research interests encompass ma-chine learning, hyperdimensional computing, and anomaly detection with applications in IoT secu-rity and cybersecurity. She has co-authored multi-ple peer-reviewed publications accepted at presti-gious IEEE conferences and serves as a reviewer for international IEEE venues. Currently working as a data analyst in the private sector, she is committed to advancing research in intelligent systems, network security, and data-driven approaches to cybersecurity challenges. 

ASHUTOSH GHIMIRE is a Ph.D. candidate and Graduate Research Assistant in the Department of Computer Science and Engineering at Wright State University. He holds an M.Sc. in Computer Science from Wright State University and a B.Eng. in Computer Engineering from Tribhuvan Univer-sity, Nepal. He previously worked as a Research Associate I, contributing to research in AI, soft-ware security, and hardware-based security. His interests include AI for software security, secure and privacy-aware AI hardware, side-channel analysis, trustworthy and ex-plainable AI, adversarially resilient AI, and applications in drug discovery and signal processing. He has co-authored several publications in prominent journals and conferences, including IEEE ISVLSI and MWSCAS.   

> 20 VOLUME 11, 2023 Author et al. : Preparation of Papers for IEEE TRANSACTIONS and JOURNALS

SAEID ATAEI is studying Structural and Systems Engineering, specializing in complex systems and optimization. He is particularly interested in us-ing deep learning and computer vision to enhance structural health monitoring and data analytics. With a strong background in networks and sys-tems, he engages in projects that address real-world challenges and embraces interdisciplinary approaches to improve systems. 

FARIS ALSULAMI (Member, IEEE) is an Assis-tant Professor with the Department of Computer and Network Engineering, College of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Jeddah, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia. He received the M.S. de-gree in Electrical Engineering from the University of Toledo, Toledo, OH, USA, in 2016, and the Ph.D. degree in Engineering from the University of Toledo, Toledo, OH, USA, in 2022. His re-search interests include hardware-assisted security for trusted embedded systems, cybersecurity, FPGA security, reverse engi-neering, side-channel attacks, and AI applications in software and hardware security. 

FATHI AMSAAD is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Computer Science and Engineer-ing at Wright State University, USA, with joint appointment in Biomedical, Industrial and Human Factors Engineering. He holds a PhD in Engineer-ing from the University of Toledo and is a Senior Member of IEEE. His research focuses on hard-ware security, embedded system security, IoT se-curity, TinyML, and trustworthy embedded AI. Dr. Amsaad has secured significant research funding from federal agencies including NSF, AFRL, and NSA, and has published extensively in peer-reviewed journals and conferences. He actively mentors graduate students and serves the academic community through editorial roles and conference committees in the hardware security and cybersecurity domains.