Development of a Humanoid Robot Prototype for
Multimodal Human-Robot Interaction
1Thang Tran Viet, 2Thanh Nguyen Canh, 1Huy Uong Gia, 1Phuc Dinh Van,1Son Tran Duc,
1Ngoc Minh Do and 1Xiem HoangVan∗
1 University of Engineering and Technology, Vietnam National University, Hanoi, Vietnam
2 School of Information Science, Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
∗Corresponding authors (xiemhoang@vnu.edu.vn)
Abstract—Human-robot interaction (HRI) enables intuitive
and intelligent collaboration between humans and robots in real-
world environments. This paper introduces a humanoid robot
prototype designed as a flexible testbed for developing and
integrating artificial intelligence (AI) modules in HRI tasks. The
system features a 12 degree-of-freedom (DOFs) dual-arm mecha-
nism and a 2 DOFs head with an expressive LCD screen to express
facial emotions. All hardware components are controlled by a
custom-designed controller board with real-time AI processing
supported by an onboard Jetson module. The system incorporates
three AI modules: (1) gesture recognition using MediaPipe Pose
and an LSTM classifier, (2) object detection with YOLO and 3D
localization, and (3) voice-command processing through speech
recognition and large language model(LLM)-based semantic
parsing. The platform is validated through experiments on
positioning accuracy, with results showing average manipulation
errors of approximately 1.83 cm. To demonstrate its versatility,
experimental results show over 90% task accuracy, with gesture
recognition reaching 96%, speech recognition reaching 92%. The
results confirm the effectiveness of the proposed system as a
reproducible and accessible humanoid platform for research and
prototyping in HRI.
Index Terms—Humanoid Robot Prototype, Human-Robot In-
teraction, Gesture Recognition, Voice Command, Object Detec-
tion
I. INTRODUCTION
Humanoid robots are a subject of growing research in-
terest due to their ability to interact naturally with people
in human-centric environments, unlike traditional industrial
robots. As invaluable platforms for education and research,
they are designed to operate in dynamic, unstructured human-
centric environments, offering natural interfaces for commu-
nication through speech, gestures, and facial expressions [1],
[2]. Building on this foundation, the rapid advancement of
artificial intelligence (AI), particularly in computer vision and
natural language processing, has further reinforced the role
of human–robot interaction (HRI) as a cornerstone of modern
robotics, enabling machines to perceive, interpret, and respond
to human behavior in increasingly collaborative scenarios [3],
[4].
In recent years, several high-profile humanoid platforms
have advanced the state-of-the-art in locomotion, manipulation,
and social expression. Unitree Robotics’ humanoid series,
including G1 [5] and newer R1 [6], represents significant
improvements in dynamic stability, energy-efficient locomo-
tion, and dual-arm manipulation within compact form factors.
These robots integrated advanced control systems, highly
optimized mechanical architectures, and cutting-edge sensory
technologies to attain superior performance. G1 focuses on
enhanced sensing and superior balance for real-world environ-
ments, whereas R1 emphasizes affordability, customizability,
and accessibility for research and education. Ameca, developed
by Engineered Arts [7], possesses the ability to express facial
expressions and extremely expressive conversational abilities.
This makes it one of the most human-like communication
platforms to date [8]. In contrast, Tesla Optimus Gen2 [9]
focuses on lightweight design, full-body mobility, and dex-
terous hands for delicate operations. Boston Dynamics’ At-
las [10] has demonstrated unprecedented agility with parkour-
like performance. These systems illustrate a trend toward
high-performance humanoid robots that integrate mobility,
perception, and interaction for human-centered applications.
Despite their technical sophistication, these platforms remain
largely closed-source and prohibitively expensive, limiting
their accessibility for education and academic research. Ex-
tended repair cycles, high manufacturing costs, and limited
modularity make them less suitable for iterative prototyping
or AI experimentation. This has motivated the development of
affordable, open, and customizable humanoid robot platforms
to democratize HRI research.
To address this challenge, several open-source educational
platforms have emerged. NimbRo-OP2X [11] is an open-
source humanoid robot designed by the University of Bonn.
With a height of 135cm and 19kg, it features torque-controlled
actuators, a GPU-enabled onboard computer, and modular 3D-
printed components. Its affordability and advanced locomotion,
perception, and manipulation capabilities make it attractive for
both research and competition, though its relatively limited de-
grees of freedom restrict highly flexible tasks. The ROBOTIS
OP2/OP3 series [12], by contrast, are compact, lightweight,
and ROS-compatible systems that provide an accessible entry
point to vision and control experiments. However, their low
payload, limited actuation strength, and small form factor
hinder applications in complex manipulation or naturalistic
HRI. The PoppyHumanoid [13] emphasizes modularity and
reproducibility using 3D-printed parts and Dynamixel motors,
making it ideal for research and classroom settings. Overall,
while these systems lower barriers to entry, they remain un-
derpowered in terms of strength, embodiment, and versatility,
leaving a gap for platforms that balance affordability with the
capability to support sophisticated HRI research.
arXiv:2609.05361v1  [cs.RO]  4 Sep 2026


In parallel, recent works have explored the integration of
modern AI into humanoid robotics. Several studies [14], [15]
proposed a framework for integrating large language models
(LLMs) to enable robots to execute manipulation tasks based
on natural language commands. Zhang et al. [16] developed
a dual-arm ROS-based robot that supports voice-controlled
manipulation, focusing on real-time coordination. In gesture-
based HRI, some methods [17]–[19] combined pose estimation
and deep learning for real-time non-verbal action recognition.
However, many of these approaches lack full-body physical
embodiment or are limited to simulation environments, reduc-
ing their relevance for real-world deployment and evaluation.
To bridge the gap between high-performance yet inacces-
sible systems and low-cost but underpowered alternatives, we
present a fully operational humanoid robot prototype tailored
for academic research and HRI experimentation. Our platform
combines affordability, modularity, and real-time AI integra-
tion across speech, vision, and gesture modalities, and is de-
signed for deployment in real-world, human-facing scenarios.
The main contributions of this work are:
1) Development of a fully 3D-printed, low-cost humanoid
robot featuring a 12 DOFs dual-arm mechanism, a 2
DOFs head, and a 7 in LCD screen for expressive facial
interaction. The system is built on ROS and uses an
onboard GPU-enabled Jetson for AI inference.
2) Incorporation of AI modules for gesture recognition,
object detection with stereo-based 3D localization, and
natural language understanding through speech recogni-
tion and LLM-based semantic parsing.
3) Implementation
and
evaluation
of
two
real-world
HRI scenarios—gesture-based interaction and voice-
command-driven object manipulation—with quantitative
analysis showing high accuracy, low latency, and robust
task execution.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: Sec-
tion II details the robot’s hardware and software architecture;
Section III presents the experimental setup and performance
evaluation; and Section IV concludes with a discussion on
limitations and future directions.
II. METHODOLOGY
This section details the design and development methodol-
ogy of the proposed humanoid robot prototype, serving as a
testbed for evaluating AI-based HRI algorithms. The system
architecture is organized into two interconnected layers: the
mechanical–electronic infrastructure, responsible for actuation
and sensing, and the AI-powered perception and control layer,
which enables responsive and adaptive behaviors.
A. Mechanical and Electronic Structure
The physical design of the humanoid robot is shown in
Fig. 1. The robot has a modular architecture, integrating
lightweight aluminum bars to build a frame and custom 3D-
printed joints and brackets. Aluminum provides durability
and load-bearing capacity for the arms and body, while 3D-
printed parts enable rapid fabrication, low-cost replacement,
Fig. 1: Illustration of our hardware design.
and customization of mechanical modules. This hybrid ap-
proach achieves both structural strength and ease of proto-
typing. As a result, the prototype weighs only 15 kg while
approximately 150 cm tall, which is close to the scale of
an average human torso. This human-scale design enhances
realism in HRI and enables gestures such as handshakes,
waves, and object handovers to occur at natural heights,
promoting intuitive experiments and their applicability in real-
world contexts.
The robot features a 12-degree-of-freedom (DOF) dual-
arm system, each arm composed of 6 revolute joints actuated
by serial-link servo motors. The arm kinematics follow the
standard Denavit–Hartenberg (D–H) convention for coordinate
frame assignment and transformation, allowing both forward
and inverse kinematics computation for manipulation tasks,
which is detailed in our previous study [20]. The arms are
designed to support pick-and-place operations, expressive ges-
tures, and basic physical interactions. Table I summarizes the
key specifications of the servomotors used. The servomotors
are allocated according to joint load requirements: the high-
torque DS5160 units actuate the shoulders, FT5330M drives
the elbows, and lighter TD-8120MG and MG996R units
control the wrist and end-effector. This allocation balances
strength and cost, achieving a maximum payload of approxi-
mately 600g.
TABLE I: Main specifications of servomotors used in the
humanoid robot
Servo
Weight
Voltage Range
Max. Torque
DS5160 SSG
158 g
6.0–8.4 V
65.0 kg·cm
FT5330M
67 g
6.0–7.4 V
35.5 kg·cm
TD-8120MG
56–68 g
4.8–8.4 V
22.8 kg·cm
MG996R
55 g
4.8–7.2 V
11.0 kg·cm


To enhance expressiveness and human-like communication,
the robot’s head is equipped with 2 DOFs (yaw and pitch)
for directional attention and expressiveness. A 7 in LCD
screen mounted on the face region is used to display facial
animations corresponding to the robot’s emotional state. Ad-
ditionally, a ZED 2 stereo camera is mounted above the screen
to provide RGB and depth perception for object detection
and gesture recognition. All the electronic components are
coordinated through a custom-designed controller board, which
serves as the central backbone of the hardware system. The
PCB measuring 12 × 12 cm was developed to reduce wiring
complexity, improve reliability, and provide a unified com-
munication interface for all modules. A dual-microcontroller
architecture is employed: an Arduino Mega 2560 is dedicated
to controlling the 12 DOF of the dual arms, chosen for its
large number of I/O pins, while an Arduino Uno manages the
head module and sensors. Both microcontrollers communicate
via the I2C protocol, ensuring synchronized signal exchange
with minimal wiring complexity. The controller board also
integrates a Bluetooth module, providing a wireless channel for
lightweight teleoperation and simple experimental tasks, such
as joint testing, trajectory playback, or app-based interaction.
Fig. 2 illustrates both the simulated PCB layout and the real-
world PCB mounted on the robot.
Fig. 2: Simulation and real-world PCB implemented on the
robot
The NVIDIA Jetson AGX Xavier serves as the main pro-
cessing unit, running ROS for system communication and
coordination. It also handles AI tasks, including computer
vision, gesture classification, natural language processing, and
trajectory planning for manipulation. The Jetson is integrated
with a custom controller board to form a scalable architec-
ture: microcontrollers handle low-level motor control, while
the GPU module manages high-level perception, planning,
and decision-making. This layered design separates real-time
control from AI computation, enabling both responsive per-
formance and intelligent behavior in a compact, cost-effective
humanoid platform.
Fig. 3: The components in our robot
The power and communication system of the humanoid
robot is shown in Fig. 3. A main 36V supply provides power,
which is stepped down to 19V for the Jetson processor and to
5V for the custom controller board modules. The ZED 2 stereo
camera and microphone are connected directly to the Jetson.
All servos run on the regulated 5V line, with their control
signals managed through a dedicated controller board. This
layered setup guarantees stable power distribution, organized
wiring, and a clear separation between computing, sensing,
and actuation. The robot’s components and their key technical
specifications are summarized in Table II.
B. AI Integration and Software Architecture
Fig. 4 illustrates an overview of our software system, which
is organized into three modular AI modules that collectively
enable the robot to perceive, understand, and respond to human
interaction cues: (1) object detection, (2) gesture recognition,
and (3) voice-command interpretation.
1) Object recognition: The object detection module used
the ZED2 stereo camera to acquire RGB and depth data
from the environment. A YOLO-based object detector [21]
is applied to the RGB stream to identify object classes and
bounding box in pixel space. These pixel coordinates are then
projected into 3D world coordinates using the depth map
provided by the stereo camera. To ensure accurate localization,
intrinsic calibration of the stereo camera is performed using
a standard chessboard pattern to correct for lens distortion.
The final (Xr, Yr, Zr) coordinates are used to compute inverse
kinematics and generate control commands for the robot arms,
enabling precise object manipulation within the workspace.
2) Gesture recognition: The gesture recognition module fa-
cilitates non-verbal communication. It consists of three stages:


Fig. 4: Overview of the proposed software architecture
TABLE II: Technical specification of components
Device
Parameters
Application
Battery
Input: 220V AC; Output: 36V 10Ah.
Power
Supply
Jetson Xavier
AGX
CPU: 8-core ARM v8.2; GPU:
512-core Volta Tensor Core; RAM: 32
GB LPDDR4x; Storage: 32 GB eMMC;
Power: 10–30W.
High-level
controller
Arduino UNO
MCU: ATmega328P; 14 digital I/O; 6
analog input; UART/I2C/SPI; 16 MHz
Low-level
controller
Arduino
Mega 2560
MCU: ATmega2560; 54 digital I/O; 16
analog input; 4 UART; 16 MHz
Low-level
controller
FSR402
Force Sensor
Force range: 0.2–20N; Resistance
range: ∼1.8 kΩ–10MΩ; Diameter: 18
mm
Grasp
feedback
ZED 2 Stereo
Camera
Dual 4 MP; FoV: 110◦; Depth sensing:
0.2-20 m; Integrated IMU + Barometer
sensor; USB 3.0
Vision
Microphone
USB 3.5 mm jack; Frequency response:
20–20 kHz
Voice
acquisition
Touch LCD
Resolution: 1024 × 600; Size: 7 in; IPS
panel; Capacitive touch; Interface:
HDMI
Display
interface
Servo
Detail in Table I
Joint
actuator
human pose estimation, temporal feature extraction, and clas-
sification. MediaPipe Pose [22] is employed for real-time
2D keypoint extraction, while a Long Short-Term Memory
(LSTM) [23] network is used to classify sequences into prede-
fined gesture categories such as waving, handshaking, and love
gestures. The model was trained on a custom dataset of gesture
sequences under varied lighting and distance conditions. Once
a gesture is detected, the robot responds with corresponding
physical motion and facial expressions displayed on the LCD
screen. This module enables the robot to engage in intuitive
non-verbal communication with users, an essential capability
for social HRI.
3) Voice Command Understanding: The voice interaction
module allows the robot to receive and interpret spoken
commands. Voice input is captured via a microphone and
transcribed using the SpeechRecognition [24]. The transcribed
text is then passed to an LLM via a structured prompt for
semantic parsing. The model outputs an action-object-location
triplet in structured JSON format. For example, the voice
command from the user “Take a cup and put it on the plate”
is interpreted as:
1
{
2
"action": "pick", "place"
3
"objects": "cup,
4
"destination": "plate"
5
}
If the objects and locations are detected by the vision
module, their 3D coordinates are retrieved, and the instruction
is translated into robot commands such as:
1
PICK(x1,y1,z1), MOVE(x2,y2,z2)
These are forwarded to the motor control unit to perform
the intended task.
III. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
To validate the effectiveness of the proposed humanoid robot
system in real-world human–robot interaction (HRI) tasks,
two experimental scenarios were implemented: (1) gesture-
based interaction and (2) voice-command execution. All tests
were conducted in an indoor laboratory environment under
consistent lighting and minimal occlusion to ensure stable
sensing performance. Videos demonstrating the results are
available at: https://youtu.be/NVSn821oaCY
A. Experimental setup
The robot prototype was placed on a fixed base in a standing
posture. A ZED2 stereo camera mounted on the robot’s head
was used for visual perception, while a directional microphone


was positioned near the user for voice input. Each experiment
was repeated multiple times to evaluate response accuracy,
latency, and robustness.
(a) Love action recognition
(b) Robot action
Fig. 5: Illustration of human-robot interaction when recogniz-
ing love gesture action.
1) Scenario 1: Gesture-based Interaction: The robot faced
the user from a distance of approximately 1.5m. The gesture
recognition module processed real-time skeletal data extracted
by MediaPipe Pose and classified sequences using the trained
LSTM model. Detected gestures, waving, loving, or hand-
shaking, triggered predefined arm motions and corresponding
emotional expressions displayed on the LCD screen.
2) Scenario 2: Voice-command Execution and Object De-
tection: In this scenario, the user issued verbal commands
such as “Take the cup and put it on the plate”. The voice
was converted to text using speech recognition and parsed
into executable robot instructions by an LLM. Simultaneously,
the ZED2 stereo camera detected and localized the specified
objects in 3D space using YOLO. The final robot command
sequence was translated into pick-and-place operations using
inverse kinematics.
B. Results and Evaluation
In this section, each AI module was evaluated independently
and in combination to assess the robot’s ability to respond
accurately and naturally in HRI scenarios.
1) Gesture Recognition Performance:
The LSTM-based
gesture recognition module achieved a recognition accuracy of
96% across three predefined gestures. The average response
latency, measured from gesture completion to robot action
initiation, was 1.2 seconds. Example response, include waving
back with a smiling face and audio playback, or performing a
handshake when the corresponding gesture is detected. These
behaviors demonstrate the robot’s ability to engage in non-
verbal social cues, as illustrated in Fig. 5.
2) Voice Command and Object Detection Accuracy: The
voice-command pipeline was evaluated using 300 randomly
issued spoken instructions. The speech recognition system
achieved a 92% transcription accuracy, while the LLM-based
intent parser achieved 96% semantic parsing accuracy. YOLO-
based object detection maintained over 90% accuracy across
varying lighting conditions and object types. Once the com-
mands were parsed and the objects detected, the robot suc-
cessfully executed the pick-and-place tasks. Despite relying
on the Gemini API, the system maintained a short response
time, generating actions within about 2 seconds on average.
This efficiency was achieved because representing the output
as structured JSON commands required fewer tokens to be
generated, thereby reducing processing latency. As a result,
the system satisfied the requirements for real-time scenarios.
An illustration of the robot recognizing and interacting with
objects is shown in Fig. 6.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Fig. 6: Robot recognizing and interacting with objects.
3) Positioning and Manipulation Precision:: The robot’s
manipulation accuracy was evaluated by measuring the Eu-
clidean error between target and actual positions across 10 tri-
als. The average positional errors are summarized in Table III.
The system demonstrates stable performance in localization
and manipulation tasks. The robot can reach and manipulate


TABLE III: Results of performance evaluation in position error
of each arm (cm)
Times
Left arm
Right arm
Integrated system
1
1.05
1.07
1.30
2
1.28
0.88
1.24
3
1.29
0.96
1.84
4
1.55
1.36
3.48
5
1.56
1.68
3.82
6
1.25
1.24
1.51
7
0.88
1.87
0.41
8
1.86
0.88
0.97
9
0.78
1.50
1.50
10
1.48
1.40
2.26
Average
1.30
1.28
1.83
target objects within an average positioning error of approx-
imately 1.3 cm for both arms. Integration with YOLO intro-
duces additional errors due to detection and transformation
noise, with an average error of 1.83 cm. Overall, the robot
achieves a pick-and-place success rate of approximately 90%,
confirming the reliability of the combined perception and
control system in real-world HRI scenarios.
IV. CONCLUSION
This paper presented the design, development, and evalua-
tion of a humanoid robot prototype for real-world human-robot
interaction tasks. The system integrates a 12-DOF dual-arm
mechanism, a 2-DOF expressive head with an LCD screen,
and a custom-designed control board, forming a modular and
scalable hardware platform. On the software side, the robot
incorporates three core AI modules: gesture recognition using
MediaPipe Pose and an LSTM network, object detection with
YOLO and stereo-based 3D localization, and natural lan-
guage understanding through speech recognition and an LLM-
based semantic parsing. Two real-world interaction scenarios,
gesture-based communication and voice command-driven ob-
ject manipulation, were implemented and tested. Experimental
results demonstrate performance across all modules, with ges-
ture recognition achieving up to 96% accuracy, voice command
execution approximately 90% successful, and pick-and-place
operations maintaining an average positioning error of less
than 1.9 cm. Despite the system’s strong performance, a key
limitation lies in its reliance on external LLM APIs, which
introduce latency and dependency on internet connectivity.
Future work will focus on integrating lightweight, on-device
language models to improve real-time responsiveness.
ACKNOWLEDGE
This work was supported by the JST SPRING, Japan Grant
Number JPMJSP2102.
REFERENCES
[1] C. Zhang, J. Chen, J. Li, Y. Peng, and Z. Mao, “Large language models
for human–robot interaction: A review,” Biomimetic Intelligence and
Robotics, vol. 3, no. 4, p. 100131, 2023.
[2] R. Jahanmahin, S. Masoud, J. Rickli, and A. Djuric, “Human-robot
interactions in manufacturing: A survey of human behavior modeling,”
Robotics and Computer-Integrated Manufacturing, vol. 78, p. 102404,
2022.
[3] A.-N. Sharkawy, “A survey on applications of human-robot interaction,”
Sensors & Transducers, vol. 251, no. 4, pp. 19–27, 2021.
[4] M. Selvaggio, M. Cognetti, S. Nikolaidis, S. Ivaldi, and B. Siciliano,
“Autonomy in physical human-robot interaction: A brief survey,” IEEE
Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 7989–7996, 2021.
[5] U. G1, “Unitree g1 humanoid agent ai avatar,” 2024. [Online].
Available: https://www.unitree.com/g1
[6] U. H1,
“Unitree r1
ultra-lightweight, fully customizable,”
2025.
[Online]. Available: https://www.unitree.com/R1
[7] E. Arts, “Ameca: The future face of robotics,” 2022.
[8] K. Berns and A. Ashok, ““you scare me”: the effects of humanoid
robot appearance, emotion, and interaction skills on uncanny valley
phenomenon,” in Actuators, vol. 13, no. 10.
MDPI, 2024, p. 419.
[9] O. Gen2, “Tesla optimusc humanoid robot,” 2024. [Online]. Available:
https://www.tesla.com/en eu/AI
[10] G. Nelson, A. Saunders, and R. Playter, “The petman and atlas robots at
boston dynamics,” in Humanoid robotics: A reference.
Springer, 2017,
pp. 1–18.
[11] G. Ficht, H. Farazi, D. Rodriguez, D. Pavlichenko, P. Allgeuer, A. Bran-
denburger, and S. Behnke, “Nimbro-op2x: Affordable adult-sized 3d-
printed open-source humanoid robot for research,” International Journal
of Humanoid Robotics, vol. 17, no. 05, p. 2050021, 2020.
[12] ROBOTIS, “Robotis op3,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://emanual.
robotis.com/docs/en/platform/op3/introduction/
[13] M. Lapeyre, P. Rouanet, J. Grizou, S. N’Guyen, A. Le Falher, F. De-
praetre, and P.-Y. Oudeyer, “Poppy: Open source 3d printed robot for
experiments in developmental robotics,” in 4th International Conference
on Development and Learning and on Epigenetic Robotics. IEEE, 2014,
pp. 173–174.
[14] H. Liu, Y. Zhu, K. Kato, I. Kondo, T. Aoyama, and Y. Hasegawa, “Llm-
based human-robot collaboration framework for manipulation tasks,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.14972, 2023.
[15] T. N. Canh, K. H. Van, and X. HoangVan, “Context-aware llm-based
human-robot interaction,” in International Conference on Intelligent
Systems and Networks.
Lecture Notes in Networks and Systems,
Springer, 2025.
[16] Y. Zhang, Z. Lu, C. Wang, C. Liu, and Y. Wang, “Voice control dual arm
robot based on ros system,” in 2018 IEEE International Conference on
Intelligence and Safety for Robotics (ISR).
IEEE, 2018, pp. 232–237.
[17] Z. Shen, A. Elibol, and N. Y. Chong, “Understanding nonverbal com-
munication cues of human personality traits in human-robot interaction,”
IEEE/CAA Journal of Automatica Sinica, vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 1465–1477,
2020.
[18] M. Peral, A. Sanfeliu, and A. Garrell, “Efficient hand gesture recognition
for human-robot interaction,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters,
vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 10 272–10 279, 2022.
[19] T. N. Canh, T. T. Viet, S. T. Duc, H. N. The, T. H. Dao, V.-H.
Nguyen, and X. HoangVan, “Efficient human-robot interaction via deep
perception and flexible motion planning,” in International Conference
on Interactive Collaborative Robotics.
Lecture Notes in Artificial
Intelligence, Springer, 2025.
[20] T. N. Canh, S. T. Duc, H. N. The, T. H. Dao, and X. HoangVan, “Optimal
design and fabrication of frame structure for dual-arm service robots: An
effective approach for human–robot interaction,” Engineering Science
and Technology, an International Journal, vol. 56, p. 101763, 2024.
[21] C.-Y. Wang, I.-H. Yeh, and H.-Y. Mark Liao, “Yolov9: Learning what
you want to learn using programmable gradient information,” in Euro-
pean conference on computer vision.
Springer, 2024, pp. 1–21.
[22] Google AI Edge. (2025) Mediapipe: Cross-platform, customizable
ml solutions for live and streaming media. [Online]. Available:
https://github.com/google-ai-edge/mediapipe
[23] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,” Neural
computation, vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, 1997.
[24] Uberi, “Speechrecognition - speech recognition module for python,
supporting several engines and apis,” https://github.com/Uberi/speech
recognition, 2023, accessed: 2025-06-14.
[25] C. Y. Kim, C. P. Lee, and B. Mutlu, “Understanding large-language
model (llm)-powered human-robot interaction,” in Proceedings of the
2024 ACM/IEEE international conference on human-robot interaction,
2024, pp. 371–380.
[26] G. Ficht, H. Farazi, D. Rodriguez, D. Pavlichenko, P. Allgeuer,
A. Brandenburger, and S. Behnke, “Nimbro-op2x: Affordable adult-
sized 3d-printed open-source humanoid robot for research,” International
Journal of Humanoid Robotics, vol. 17, no. 05, p. 2050021, Oct. 2020.
[Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1142/S0219843620500218
